3:3

E O Mecha et al.

C40–C43

COMMENTARY

Endometriosis among African women
Ezekiel O Mecha 1, Joseph N Njagi2, Roselydiah N Makunja1, Charles O A Omwandho1,3, Philippa T K Saunders
and Andrew W Horne 4

4

1Department of Biochemistry, University of Nairobi, Nairobi, Kenya
2Marple Grove Gynecological Centre, Kerugoya, Kenya
3Kirinyaga University, Kerugoya, Kenya
4EXPPECT Centre, Queen’s Medical Research Institute, Edinburgh Bioquarter, The University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK

Correspondence should be addressed to E O Mecha: emecha@uonbi.ac.ke

Abstract
Endometriosis has long been wrongly perceived to be rare among women of African descent. The misconception about
the prevalence of endometriosis among African women has significantly contributed to long diagnostic delays, limited
access to diagnosis and care, and a scarcity of research on the condition among African women. In this commentary, we
highlight the prevalence of endometriosis among African women, the state of endometriosis care in Africa, and the gaps
in knowledge that need to be addressed. Based on the available data, the prevalence of endometriosis in Africa is likely
higher than previously thought, with varying subtypes. There is a long diagnostic delay of endometriosis among African
women. Additionally, endometriosis care in Africa from the general population and health practitioners is poor; this
can be attributed to the high diagnostic cost, scarcity of trained specialists, as well as patients’ inability to express their
symptoms due to societal taboos surrounding menstrual health. Public sensitization on endometriosis may help improve
endometriosis diagnosis and care in Africa.

Lay summary
Endometriosis is a condition in which tissue like the uterine lining is found outside the uterus, causing women to
experience pain especially before, during, or after menstruation. Although endometriosis affects an estimated 176 million
women worldwide, it has been wrongly reported that endometriosis is a rare condition among African women, mainly
due to lack of awareness among healthcare providers and historical bias. In the current commentary, we discuss the
prevalence of endometriosis, the diagnostic delays, and the care of endometriosis among black African women living
in the African continent. Much of the literature has demonstrated (falsely) that endometriosis is rare in Black women
compared to White ethnicity. African women experience a long diagnostic delay and do not receive appropriate care.
Public awareness of endometriosis may help improve diagnosis delay and endometriosis care in Africa.
Keywords:  endometriosis   diagnostic delay   endometriosis care   African women
Reproduction and Fertility (2022) 3 C40–C43

Key points
•

The prevalence of endometriosis in women in Africa
is unknown.

https://raf.bioscientifica.com
https://doi.org/10.1530/RAF-22-0040

© 2022 The authors
Published by Bioscientifica Ltd

•

Women in Africa with symptoms caused
endometriosis experience barriers to diagnosis.

by

This work is licensed under a Creative Commons
Downloaded
from Bioscientifica.com at 03/25/2024
05:12:45PM
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives
4.0
via Open Access.
This work
is licensed under a Creative Commons
International
License.
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/

3:3

E O Mecha et al.

•

•

Development and implementation of treatments
suitable for African women have been hampered by a
lack of research in local populations.
Social and societal factors need to be addressed to
normalize dialogue about menstrual disorder and
improve the dignity of women.

Introduction
Endometriosis, one of the most common gynecological
conditions affecting women, has been generally perceived
to be rare among African women (Kyama et al. 2007). Several
factors have been implicated: a lack of awareness among
the public and healthcare practitioners, poor access to
diagnostic and therapeutic facilities, as well as inadequate
research on the condition among African populations
(Kyama et al. 2007). Differences in culture and lifestyle in
women living in Africa compared with Europe including
earlier age at first pregnancy, multiple pregnancies with
large families, higher risk of pelvic inflammatory disease,
and taboos surrounding menstruation and pain have
also been cited (Wiswedel & Allen 1989). We believe
a combination of these factors may impact the risk
factors and health outcomes for African women with
endometriosis which currently remain poorly understood.
Over the next years, it is predicted that increased access
to education and changes in cultural practice will result in
a delay in the first pregnancy and a reduction in family size
among African women residing in the African continent.
Given the strong association between increased exposure to
menstrual flow (via fallopian tubes or vasculature) and risk
of endometriosis, it is of concern that this may predispose
African women to the earlier onset or more severe disease
(Zondervan et al. 2020). In this commentary, we consider
the published evidence related to endometriosis care in
Africa and the gaps in knowledge that need to be addressed.

Prevalence of endometriosis in Africa
The exact prevalence rate of endometriosis in Africa is
unknown with different studies reporting conflicting
results between different countries. A study carried out
in South Africa on factors contributing to infertility
reported that the prevalence of endometriosis among the
black population was lower (2%) than that of the White
population (7%) (Wiswedel & Allen 1989). However, in a
cross-sectional study in Nigeria, Fawole et al. (2015) reported
a prevalence of 48.1% in women having a diagnostic
https://raf.bioscientifica.com
https://doi.org/10.1530/RAF-22-0040

© 2022 The authors
Published by Bioscientifica Ltd

C41

laparoscopy, stating it was one of the highest prevalence
rates in Africa. The difference in prevalence reported by
the different authors may be attributed to several factors
including access to healthcare, differences in methods used
to determine and diagnose endometriosis, classification
of the condition, and the number of individuals involved
in the studies. Additionally, the paucity of research on
endometriosis among women of different races and social
statuses is likely to be a key contributing factor to the
different prevalence rates reported (Kyama et al. 2007).
Women living in Africa, as opposed to those of African
descent living in countries such as the USA, are underrepresented in the genetic studies which have identified
common genetic risk factors associated with high-grade
disease (Zondervan et al. 2020).

Diagnostic delay
Diagnostic delay of endometriosis is seen globally on
average 7–10 years, but this delay is a major challenge faced
by women in Africa which is exacerbated by lack of trained
specialists who can accurately diagnose endometriosis in its
early stages (Kyama et al. 2007) and lack of education about
the symptoms of endometriosis among African women
and healthcare workers (Kyama et al. 2007). An acute
problem is the need to break down taboos and increase
the range of accessible information so that women and
healthcare providers are better able to discuss issues related
to menstruation, infertility, pain symptoms, and when
to seek medical attention. In a semi-structured interview
conducted with 25 South African women diagnosed with
endometriosis, most participants stated that they had little
or no knowledge about endometriosis; thus, they relied
on the information provided by the healthcare providers,
which in some cases was not sufficient (Nnoaham et al.
2011).
The first East and Southern Africa regional symposium
on improving menstrual health management for adolescent
girls and women held in 2018 highlighted key challenges
including unmet needs, negative social norms, and
beliefs, as well as stigma and discrimination (Department
of Women in the Presidency of the Republic of South
Africa & UNFPA East and Southern Africa Regional Office
2017). Specifically in African culture, issues surrounding
menstruation are considered personal and this means that
women often do not feel free to discuss anything unusual
about their menstrual cycle for fear of stigmatization
leading to diagnostic delay even if symptoms are severe.
The report also noted that there was both limited data and
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons
Downloaded
from Bioscientifica.com at 03/25/2024
05:12:45PM
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives
4.0
via Open Access.
This work
is licensed under a Creative Commons
International
License.
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/

3:3

E O Mecha et al.

C42

‘silence’ on vaginal bleeding not related to menstruation,
which can be associated with conditions such as fibroids,
endometriosis, and post-partum bleeding. One of the
conclusions from the meeting was to highlight the urgent
need for improved education of healthcare workers and
menstruating women on what constitutes normal and
abnormal vaginal bleeding.

et al. 2011). The women said endometriosis affected their
sexual life due to fear of painful intercourse, forcing them
to avoid it. Although some participants acknowledged the
support they received from their partners, some noted
that their partners were suspicious of their reluctance to
have sex leading to conflicts and relationship breakdown
(Nnoaham et al. 2011).

Subtypes of endometriosis that have been
reported among African women

Treatment and care

Several studies have reported subtypes of endometriosis
among African women. A study in Ghana reported a
case of catamenial pneumothorax in which the patient
experienced painless abdominal distention during her
menses (Okyere et al. 2019). The case was first treated
as dysmenorrhea because it was not associated with
gastrointestinal symptoms. Another study in Ghana
involving 12 women reported pneumothorax (50%),
hemothorax (41.7%), and hemopneumothorax (8.3%)
(Okyere et al. 2019). In Nigeria, a case of chronic intestinal
obstruction due to rectosigmoid endometriosis was
reported in a 29-year-old woman (Tade 2006). These
reports show that forms of endometriosis considered rare
in European and other countries outside Africa are being
detected in African women and suggest that the more
common forms of endometriosis that present with milder
or less obvious symptoms are being underreported. The
reports presented may suggest that African women present
only with more severe symptoms but tend not to seek
medical attention with dysmenorrhea.

Impacts of endometriosis
Endometriosis severely impacts the quality of life of those
affected. Feelings of distress, moodiness, frustration,
isolation, low self-esteem, and hopelessness have been
reported among African women with endometriosis
(Nnoaham et al. 2011). Often these feelings are linked to
the pain they experience, difficulties in managing the pain,
and are compounded by a lack of understanding regarding
symptomatic endometriosis (Nnoaham et al. 2011). A
study on the biopsychosocial predictors of the symptoms
of depression in 25 South African women diagnosed
with endometriosis reported that 43.1% of the women
suffered from moderate to severe symptoms of depression,
reporting impacts on physical functioning, as well as
negative feelings about the medical profession (Nnoaham
https://raf.bioscientifica.com
https://doi.org/10.1530/RAF-22-0040

© 2022 The authors
Published by Bioscientifica Ltd

There is a wide variation on the standards of care
experienced by women with endometriosis in Africa.
Roomaney and Kagee (Nnoaham et al. 2011), reporting
on a sample of South African women diagnosed with
endometriosis, recorded that they experienced difficulties
in explaining their symptoms and asking questions with
the fear that they will appear ignorant. They also noted
that women who had access to private healthcare found
laparoscopy to be expensive, while those who sought
care from public facilities had to wait for long periods for
diagnostic laparoscopy and surgery to treat endometriosis
(Nnoaham et al. 2011). Additionally, they noted other
concerns such as poor access to treatment, limited
treatment options, incorrect diagnosis, and the side effects
that are associated with some of the treatments (Nnoaham
et al. 2011). There are anecdotal reports that most African
women resort to nonmedical therapies such as traditional
herbal medicines and nutritional and behavioral therapies
to manage chronic pelvic pain due to endometriosis.
However, there are only limited studies on the effectiveness
of herbal medicines and their use (Kyama et al. 2007). Of
note is that access to, or use of, existing medical therapies,
was not favored because they are expensive and most
of them act as contraceptives, which were at odds with
societal emphasis on fertility (Kyama et al. 2007).

Conclusion
The prevalence of endometriosis in Africa is likely to
be far higher than currently reported and may rise as
women delay childbearing. Information about genetic
risk factors is lacking as women residents in Africa have
been underrepresented in family linkage and genetic
association studies. Diagnostic delay is a major problem
for symptomatic women, and this is complicated by
variations in access to healthcare as well as awareness
among healthcare professionals. Thus, there is a need
for further research including potential phenotypic
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons
Downloaded
from Bioscientifica.com at 03/25/2024
05:12:45PM
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives
4.0
via Open Access.
This work
is licensed under a Creative Commons
International
License.
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/

3:3

E O Mecha et al.

variation of endometriosis in this population and the
goals of care for the patients. The first East and Southern
Africa regional symposium on improving menstrual
health management for adolescent girls and women made
several important recommendations including the need
for better communication and community involvement
of traditional and religious leaders as a vital step toward
changing perceptions, healthcare practices, and reducing
societal and social stigma surrounding menstrual health.
Establishing such programs is important because it will
help in the normalization of menstruation and promotion
of self-dignity, self-esteem, and self-worth among African
women. In addition, cross-regional collaboration,
international collaborations and the establishment of
health programs are important approaches in contributing
to quality assurance in research and medical care and to
improving endometriosis perception in society.

Declaration of interest
The authors declare that there is no conflict of interest that could be
perceived as prejudicing the impartiality of this commentary.

Funding
This work did not receive any specific grant from any funding agency in the
public, commercial, or not-for-profit sector.

Data availability statement
The data presented in this study are available on request from the
corresponding author.

Author contribution statement
Collection of manuscripts and proofreading (E O M, A W H, P T K S),
suggestions and proofreading (J N N, C O A O, R M), writing and proofreading

https://raf.bioscientifica.com
https://doi.org/10.1530/RAF-22-0040

© 2022 The authors
Published by Bioscientifica Ltd

C43

(R M, J N N, E O M, A W H, P T K S) and whole concept, literature search,
writing, proofreading, and statistical analysis (E O M, A W H, P T K S). All
authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.

References
Department of Women in the Presidency of the Republic of South Africa
& UNFPA East and Southern Africa Regional Office 2018 First East
and Southern Africa Regional Symposium Improving Menstrual Health
Management for Adolescent Girls and Women. Department of Women
in the Presidency of the Republic of South Africa & UNFPA East and
Southern Africa Regional Office.
Fawole AO, Bello FA, Ogunbode O, Odukogbe ATA, Nkwocha GC,
Nnoaham KE, Zondervan KT, Akintan A, Abdus-Salam RA &
Okunlola MA 2015 Endometriosis and associated symptoms among
Nigerian women. International Journal of Gynaecology and Obstetrics
130 190–194. (https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijgo.2015.02.030)
Kyama CM, Mwenda JM, Machoki J, Mihalyi A, Simsa P,
Chai DC & D’Hooghe TM 2007 Endometriosis in African
women. Women’s Health 3 629–635. (https://doi.
org/10.2217/17455057.3.5.629)
Nnoaham KE, Hummelshoj L, Webster P, d’Hooghe T, de Cicco
Nardone F, de Cicco Nardone C, Jenkinson C, Kennedy SH,
Zondervan KT & World Endometriosis Research Foundation Global
Study of Women’s Health consortium 2011 Impact of endometriosis
on quality of life and work productivity: a multicenter study across
ten countries. Fertility and Sterility 96 366.e8–373.e8. (https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.fertnstert.2011.05.090)
Okyere I, Glover PSK, Forson PK, Okyere P & Blood-Dzraku D
2019 Catamenial pneumothorax in Ghana: case report and literature
review. Pan African Medical Journal 33 287. (https://doi.org/10.11604/
pamj.2019.33.287.14187)
Tade AO 2006 Chronic intestinal obstruction due to rectosigmoid
endometriosis: a case report. Nigerian Journal of Medicine 15 165–166.
(https://doi.org/10.4314/njm.v15i2.37104)
Wiswedel K & Allen DA 1989 Infertility factors at the Groote Schuur
Hospital fertility clinic. South African Medical Journal 76 65–66.
Zondervan KT, Becker CM & Missmer SA 2020 Endometriosis. New
England Journal of Medicine 382 1244–1256. (https://doi.org/10.1056/
NEJMra1810764)

Received in final form 11 June 2022
Accepted 5 September 2022
Accepted Manuscript published online 5 September 2022

This work is licensed under a Creative Commons
Downloaded
from Bioscientifica.com at 03/25/2024
05:12:45PM
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives
4.0
via Open Access.
This work
is licensed under a Creative Commons
International
License.
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/

