EMPIRICAL STUDIES

doi: 10.1111/scs.12810

About me as a person not only the disease – piloting Guided
Self-Determination in an outpatient endometriosis setting
Susan Munch Simonsen M.Ed., RN (Educational Consultant)1,2, Charlotte Strømberg MPG, RN (Head of
Nursing)1, Vibeke Zoffmann PhD, MPH, RN (Professor, Head of Research)3,4
, Dorte Hartwell MD (Senior
Consultant)1 and Mette Linnet Olesen PhD, MPH, RN (Clinical Researcher, Nurse Specialist)1,3
1

Department of Gynecology, Copenhagen University Hospital, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark, 2Centre for Human Resources and
Education, The Capital Region of Denmark, Denmark, 3Research Unit Women’s and Children’s Health, Copenhagen University Hospital,
Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark and 4Copenhagen University, Copenhagen, Denmark

Scand J Caring Sci; 2020; 34: 1017–1027
About me as a person not only the disease – piloting
Guided Self-Determination in an outpatient endometriosis setting

Introduction: Endometriosis is a chronic disease affecting
5–10% of women in the reproductive age. Despite surgical and medical treatment, many women struggle with
pain, infertility, sexual dysfunction, depression, distress
and reduced workability, affecting their overall quality of
life. The usual follow-up procedures may not support the
women’s self-management of this condition. Therefore,
person-centred empowerment-based approaches are
needed.
Aim: To assess if the implementation of the Guided SelfDetermination method targeted women with complex
endometriosis appeared feasible and supported selfmanagement.
Methods: Guided Self-Determination was offered to 10
out-patients with complex endometriosis. Each of the
women had five conversations based on prefilled diseasespecific reflection sheets. A qualitative evaluation was
conducted in 2016–2017 covering semi-structured, telephone interviews and focus group interviews, which
were analysed using thematic analysis. Additionally, we
assessed if the women changed the self-reported

Introduction
Endometriosis is a gynaecological disease defined by the
presence of endometrial-like tissue outside the uterus
causing chronic inflammation (1). The prevalence is estimated to be about 5–10% of the general female

Correspondence to:
Mette Linnet Olesen, Department of Gynecology, Copenhagen
University Hospital, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark.
E-mail: mette.linnet.olesen@regionh.dk
© 2019 Nordic College of Caring Science

questionnaires, Endometriosis Health Profile 30 and the
Patient Activation Measure from before and after the
conversations.
Results: We identified four themes: feeling alone with the
disease; establishing a meaningful relationship with
healthcare professionals in a traditional hospital setting;
person-specific knowledge facilitated new behaviours
and; accepting a chronic condition – the beginning of a
process. All dimensions of the Endometriosis Health Profile 30 and the Patient Activation Measure appeared to
improve at two weeks and so did almost all the dimensions of Endometriosis Health Profile 30 after 1 year.
Conclusions: The implementation of the Guided SelfDetermination method appeared feasible and the women
developed self-management skills in relation to
endometriosis and its symptoms. This was achieved by
increasing insight into their needs and behaviours and
gaining new knowledge about the disease itself. The
before-and-after assessment suggested benefit of the
intervention, but this should be further tested in a randomised trial.
Keywords: endometriosis, empowerment, self-management, nurse-led intervention, guided self-determination,
life skills, follow-up, outpatient clinic.
Submitted 4 July 2019, Accepted 28 November 2019

population of reproductive age but is much higher in
women with infertility and chronic pelvic pain (2).
Women with endometriosis experience a broad spectrum
of symptoms including pelvic pain, dysmenorrhoea and
dyspareunia (1). Sexual dysfunction is described as a
multidimensional phenomenon which is associated with
but not limited to deep dyspareunia and thus can have a
great impact on those suffering from endometriosis (3).
Women may also experience fatigue (4) psychological
challenges (5) and psychopathological comorbidities such
as somatisation, anxiety, sensitivity and depression (6–8)

1017

1018

S.M. Simonsen et al.

all of which can negatively impact their quality of life
(QOL) (9,10), sleep, perceived stress (10) and perception
of pain (7). Altogether endometriosis affects education
and workability (5) with direct and indirect socio-economic costs (7,9).
The primary purpose of endometriosis treatment is to
reduce pain and has traditionally focused on surgical and
medical treatment. Even though these treatment options
have been shown to reduce pain, women often still
struggle with pain which ultimately affects their QOL
(9,11). A Norwegian study reported that women with
moderate to severe endometriosis had poorer mental
HRQOL as compared to women with rheumatoid arthritis
(12). Therefore, it is important to address psychosocial
symptoms alongside physical symptoms. Usual follow-up
procedures following treatment appear not to support the
women’s self-management of the condition. Therefore,
person-centred interventions are needed to address all
the aspects of women’s lives suffering endometriosis and
simultaneously support their self-management skills in
relation to persisting symptoms. Searching the literature,
we have not found such interventions.
In this study, we apply a person-centred empowerment-based method, ‘Guided Self-Determination’ (GSD),
which was developed in diabetes care (13–16). It includes
patient reflection sheets and conversations with healthcare professionals (HCPs). It has successfully been transferred to other patient groups including parents to
premature children (17), patients in dialysis (18) and
patients with schizophrenia (19,20) and cancer (21,22).
In diabetes, GSD improved glycemic control (23) and has
reduced disease-related distress (24). Qualitative evaluations in the diabetes and dialysis settings have shown
GSD to be a useful person-centred problem-solving tool
that facilitates the development of life skills (18,25). In a
nurse-led stepped-care intervention, GSD improved physical QOL (22) and the development of relational competencies and problem-solving skills in gynaecological
cancer survivors (26).
In this study, we aimed to assess if the implementation
of GSD was feasible in an outpatient setting treating
endometriosis and if and how GSD impacted on the
women’s self-management of the disease. Additionally,
we assessed changes in self-reported endometriosis-specific health-related quality of life (HRQOL) and confidence
in managing health and care.

women’s experience of GSD targeted at women with
endometriosis (GSD-endo). These were supplemented
with before-and-after assessment on the self-reported
measurements, Endometriosis Health Profile 30 (EHP-30)
(28,29) and the Patient Activation Measure (PAM) (30).

Participants
From January 2016 to April 2017, women with
endometriosis were invited to participate if they indicated
complex symptoms by marking at least two of six questions in a short endometriosis screening tool developed
for the study (Table 1). Development was inspired by the
questionnaires SF 36 (31) and EHP 30 (28,29).
Additional inclusion criteria were age 18 years or
above; pre-menopausal; diagnosed with endometriosis
(histology) at least 4 months ago but not more than
10 years ago; and the ability to read and write in Danish.
Exclusion criteria were participation in a prior GSD-endo
pilot study; pregnancy or fertility treatment; pain due to
other conditions; and psychological conditions including
cognitive or psychiatric impairment, alcohol or drug
abuse and surgery planned within the next year. After
verbal and written information, women signed a written
informed consent form to participate and answered the
baseline questionnaires (Fig. 1) after which they were
mailed the preparatory reflection sheets for the first
conversation.
Fourteen women initially agreed to participate; however, four never received the intervention due to the following reasons: one became pregnant; one became
divorced; one lived too far away; and one provided no
reason for nonparticipation, leaving 10 participants to
receive the intervention.

The intervention GSD
Guided Self-Determination supports reflection, collaboration and changes in the patients’ lives facilitated by the
development of life skills in dealing with the disease
(18,25). Life skills are a comprehensive concept defined
as: ‘Those personal, social, cognitive and physical skills
that enable a person to control and direct their lives and
Table 1 Screening questions
1

Methods
Design
We used both qualitative and quantitative methods. Thematic analysis was conducted according to Braun and
Clarke (27) on data from semi-structured individual and
focus group interviews to gain knowledge of the

2
3
4
5
6

Are you worried about what the endometriosis will cause in the
future?
Do you feel limited in your daily life due to endometriosis?
Does endometriosis keep you from doing things in your daily life?
Do you consider your quality of your life affected due to
endometriosis?
Have you experienced pain due to your endometriosis within the
past 4 weeks?
Do you feel more tired than your peers?

© 2019 Nordic College of Caring Science

About me as a person not only the disease

1019

GSD CONVERSATIONS

Baseline
Questionnaire
N = 10

During a 5 months
periode at average
N = 10

DATA COLLECTION

2 weeks after
completed conversation

6 – 8 months after
completed conversation

Follow-up conversation
after 12 months N = 4

Questionnaire N = 10

Focus group interview N = 4

Questionnaire N = 4

Telephone interview
N = 9

Figure 1 Overview of the intervention and the data collection.

develop the capacity to live with and produce change in
their environment’ (32).
The main features of GSD include preparatory semistructured reflection sheets and conversations with an
HCP certified in GSD. Different reflection sheets were
completed by the patients before face-to-face conversations with the HCP. The sheets facilitate reflection and
self-insight helping the patients to acknowledge and
express their own specific needs, values and resources.
The prefilled sheets constitute the starting point for faceto-face conversations, and during these, the patient and
the HCP together create a common knowledge that provides the basis for further problem-solving of the issues
that the patient considered to be particularly important
in accordance with their values and needs.
Our study builds on a previously piloted GSD-endo
study (unpublished, presented at the 11th World Congress on Endometriosis, 2011). In our study, a total of 20
disease-specific reflection sheets were used in five conversations. In addition, four women received a one-year
follow-up conversation as a test. They were the first to
complete the GSD course, and therefore, they participated in a focus group interview in which they suggested
the follow-up conversation.

GSD certified nurses
Nurses were educated during a four-day course including
theoretical and practical training with a final test. In this
study, GSD-endo was facilitated by three nurses, who
had at least 20 years of gynaecological experience, all
employed at the Gynecological Outpatient Clinic at the
Copenhagen University Hospital, Rigshospitalet. In addition to the certification in GSD, they received two group
supervisions with a psychologist covering their experience with GSD and discussion about when to refer to a
psychologist.

Interviews
Nine women were interviewed two weeks after the last
conversation; one was not interviewed due to referral to

© 2019 Nordic College of Caring Science

a psychologist. The individual interviews lasted 25–
35 minutes and aimed to capture the women’s immediate experience of GSD-endo and the feasibility of the
intervention while the conversations were still remembered. The first question was: Why did you choose to participate in the pilot study? Thereafter, the focus was on four
areas: how they experienced the reflection sheets; the conversations with the nurse; GSD’s contribution to the development of
life skills; and the overall organisation of GSD-endo conversations. After 8 months, a 50-minute focus group interview
was conducted with four women to gain various perspectives on GSD and to assess the long-term durability of
any changes. Knowledge from the single telephone interviews qualified the questions in the focus group interview guide. The patient trajectory and time points for
data collection are presented in Fig. 1.

Analysis of interviews
Data from the two kinds of interviews were initially analysed separately but it became clear that the findings integrated and complemented each other. Therefore, we
decided to analyse them together. We used thematic
analysis (27) which was applied as a hybrid of inductive
and deductive analysis. The inductive part considered
how women with endometriosis experienced living with
the disease and receiving GSD-endo. The deductive part
referred to whether the women, like in previous qualitative evaluations of GSD, developed life skills enabling
them to self-manage their disease in daily life.
The thematic analysis was carried out by three of the
investigators (SMS, CS, MLO) in six phases: first, the
transcribed interviews were read multiple times to
become familiar with data; second, initial ideas about
codes were noted; third, the interviews were coded
independently by each investigator into codes and possible overall themes and discussed; fourth, codes and
overall themes and their potential inter-relationship
were visualised in several mind maps and were discussed; fifth, a consensus was reached on codes which
were named and defined; and sixth, findings were
reported in this article.

1020

S.M. Simonsen et al.

Questionnaires
Questionnaires were collected at three different time
points: after informed consent at baseline (n = 10), two
weeks after the last conversation (n = 10) and after one
year (n = 4) to assess potential changes short term and
long term in this particular patient group.
EHP-30. The EHP questionnaire is disease-specific and
designed to measure the women’s experience of their
HRQOL regarding endometriosis. We used the long-form
core instrument EHP-30 (28,29), which covers pain, control and powerlessness, emotional well-being, social support and self-image dimensions. Answers were given on
a five-point Likert scale, and each dimension was calculated on a scale from 0 to 100 where 0 is the best possible health status and 100 is the worst. We were granted
permission to use the Danish validated version by Isis
Innovation Limited (www.isis-innivation.com).
PAM. The PAM measures the women’s knowledge, skills
and confidence in managing health and care (30). Based
on their answers, they obtained a PAM score between 0
and 100 which classified the women on one of four
levels of activation from being passive and overwhelmed
at level 1 to having adopted behaviours to support their
health though still being struggling to maintain them
because of life stressors on level 4. A license was
obtained to use the Danish validated version from
Insignia Health (www.insigniahealth.com).
Data were entered into the software program Excel,
and descriptive statistics were calculated according to the
guidelines of the various scales including scores, medians,
interquartile ranges and median changes.

The analysis generated four themes as shown in Table 3.
The women experienced many challenges and felt lonely
in dealing with the disease. GSD-endo became the turning
point for a process where they developed life skills improving their ability to self-manage the disease in daily life. In
the following, we describe the themes in detail.

Feeling alone with the disease
In the single interviews, all the women expressed that
their motivation for participating was a feeling of loneliness. They described, trying different methods to receive
help with their condition but had not succeeded in getting what they needed ‘I had no life left in me, physically, mentally or socially. My illness continually
consumed everything (Woman 7)’. They had several
worries regarding fertility, sexuality, their relationship to
their partner and having to take sick leave due to pain.
The usual follow-up had not fulfilled their needs.
The women expressed that they did not share their
problems with others because they felt that nobody
understood ‘I have never talked about my illness with
anyone (Woman 8)’. A barrier for others to understand
the disease and the related pain was that it was invisible
‘There are many who say: ‘You do not look like someone
who has such a pain’ but that is because I am used to
having pain every day (Woman 5)’.

Establishing a meaningful relationship with HCPs in a
traditional hospital setting
The women appreciated being invited to evaluate the
new empowerment-based approach in the outpatient
Table 3 Themes and subthemes

Results

Themes

Subthemes

Baseline characteristics of the 10 participating women are
shown in Table 2.

Feeling alone with the disease

Table 2 Characteristics of participants

Establishing a meaningful
relationship with HCPs in a
traditional hospital setting

Not knowing what to do
Difficult to explain to others
Worried about the future
Reduced expectations to the HCPs
Equality
Different expectations to the HCPs
Seen as a person
A feeling of being acknowledged
Increasing trust
Gaining insight into themselves and
their previous behaviour
Gaining knowledge about the
disease and treatment
Developing life skills in relation to
endometrioses
Not feeling abnormal anymore
Increased self-confidence
Increased quality of life
In short term and long term

Women

Age

Number
of births

Endometriosis stage
based on ASRM score

Number of
prior surgeries

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

25–30
35–40
20–25
40–45
25–30
25–30
30–35
40–45
35–40
25–30

0
0
0
0
0
2
0
2
0
0

2
4
1
3
4
2
4
4
4
4

2
1
1
2
1
4
1
1
3
8

Person-specific knowledge
facilitated new behaviours

Accepting a chronic condition
– the beginning of a process

© 2019 Nordic College of Caring Science

About me as a person not only the disease
clinic that normally represented a biomedical approach to
them. They experienced that the GSD-endo conversations differed from the dialog they usually had with professionals ‘It has been very different from other
conversations. I have gotten more in-depth answers and
much deeper talks (Woman 4)’. They pointed out that
these conversations were focused on their personal needs
and preferences. They experienced it was an advantage
that the nurses had both communicative competences,
disease-specific knowledge and time for conversations
was prioritised ‘Nice that it [the GSD conversations] was
held in the outpatient clinic and good that the outpatient
clinic also created something good and positive because
the visits usually caused something negative and frustrating (Woman 1)’.
During the GSD-endo conversations, the women
expressed having a more equal dialog with the nurses
than normally and they also began to have new expectations to the collaboration with all the HCPs in the multidisciplinary endometriosis team. ‘It has been exciting and
rewarding. I didn’t expect to gain so much from this. It
made so much sense to me and the outcome has been
good in terms of the future and myself (Woman 1)’.
They described that the prefilled reflection sheets
offered structure and reflection. It helped them to organise their thoughts and challenges and prepared them for
the conversations ‘Words put on the sheets helped to
prepare and set structure and direction (Woman 6)’. This
preparation provided insight into challenges and actions
in relation to their disease which they were previously
not aware of. The new insight led to a deeper and more
focused subsequent conversation ‘the sheets helped to
get around difficult things (Woman 3)’. They experienced
that the GSD-endo conversations had a positive focus on
what they could do to manage the disease themselves ‘I
have learned more about myself. It is okay to ask for
help and I have greater care for myself’ (Woman 3).
They appreciated the focus on their whole life situation
with endometriosis ‘I was seen as a person. It was about
me and not just about the disease (Woman 10)’. They
emphasised that a prerequisite for the conversations was
mutual trust enabling them to share intimate concerns and
dare to talk about things that they found were difficult.
‘The nurse had the knowledge and understood. . . I felt
very safe. I am usually very cautious and quiet, and I don’t
simply talk to others (Woman 9)’. They also appreciated
the time for GSD-endo conversations ‘During these conversations there was time and 100% focus (Woman 6)’.

Person-specific knowledge facilitated new behaviours
The women gained new disease-specific knowledge about
endometriosis, treatment and symptoms as well as personal knowledge about themselves and their way of
managing endometriosis in daily life. ‘I have become
© 2019 Nordic College of Caring Science

1021

more aware of my thinking patterns. When I get sad and
frustrated, I can better understand it and I have a better
insight (Woman 1)’. The new personal knowledge made
it easier to deal with the symptoms.
It has given me more knowledge, and my boyfriend
also knows more now because we can talk about
things based on the sheets. It’s the same at work,
because I’m more open and can tell them more
about it (Woman 3).
Their personal knowledge was obtained by awareness
and insight into their previous way of thinking and dealing with the disease, and they developed a more positive
mindset. New actions and behaviours were described
which provided the women with a sense of being in
control.
I have gotten new and better thinking patterns and
a more positive view. I have become better at taking
pain medication and dare to connect my disease to
my emotions. I have obtained tools for problemsolving. I still have the same emotions, but they are
easier to handle (Woman 5).
They received support to change inappropriate ways in
which they had previously managed the disease: ‘I took
pain medications – both Dolol and Oxycontin. I have
now been drugfree for a month and a half and only take
medicine when needed. The nurse believed in me and
was certain that I could get off the pain relief medication. . . we fought together (Woman 9)’.
It was a common theme that they became better at
communicating needs. They began to explain
endometriosis and their challenges to friends, family and
colleagues: ‘I ask for help, and they [GSD-endo conversations] have helped me with being more open to everyone. My work [colleagues] had no knowledge about the
disease, and therefore I have been able to educate them
about it. I realized that it is about me (Woman 3)’.

Accepting a chronic condition – the beginning of a process
The women became better at prioritising which problems
to address and solve and accepting that not all could be
solved ‘I have gained greater acceptance [after the GSD
conversations] and I’m in a process of gaining complete
acceptance (Woman 3)’. They started to accept living
with endometriosis and the inescapable and persistent
symptoms. ‘I have gained a much greater emotional
acceptance of the disease. I want to be healthier and I
found out that I need to accept my body. I have gone
from frustrations to actions (Woman 5)’.
This process of acceptance seemed to be initiated by
the knowledge about their reactions and the new disease-specific knowledge ‘I’ve got a lot out of talking to
someone who has a lot of knowledge and understanding
of my illness and the sheets have supported me to think
deeper about things (Woman 4)’. They realised that they

1022

S.M. Simonsen et al.

were not alone, and their challenges were common to
other women with endometriosis too. This introduced an
experience of being normal which contrasted a previous
feeling of being abnormal. ‘I have always felt very abnormal but at the conversations it [her situation and behavior] was normalized and I gained tools and methods to
explain the disease at home (Woman 1)’.
The focus group interview including four women six to
eight months after the GSD conversations revealed that
the new approaches to the disease and the acceptance of
their situation were still maintained. ‘My whole quality
of life has improved. And I still have cysts on my intestines and daily pain, so it [the disease] is not . . . so to
say. . . much better. But something has happened to me
and my handling of the disease has changed my life radically (Woman 1)’. Another woman describes ‘I am at
peace with myself and I am at peace with my illness
(Woman 5)’.

Structure and organisation of GSD conversations
Because we aimed to assess if the GSD was feasible for
implementation in our clinical practice, the women were
asked about the overall organisation of the conversations.
They found five conversations suitable but suggested two
to four weeks between them would have provided time
for reflection. One hour was the optimal length to get
into the depths of the problems, and an undisturbed setting was valued. It was important for trust and openness
that the same nurse facilitated all conversations. Most
women did not care whether the nurse was dressed in
uniform or not. It was suggested that the number of conversations could be individualised in the future based on
needs. The four women who participated in the focus
group interview would appreciate a long-term follow-up
conversation one year after the GSD standard course
(five conversations).

continued to score level one before and after the conversations. After 12 months, the delta change was only 0.5.

Discussion
This combined qualitative and quantitative study provides important results from a newly developed empowerment-based intervention, GSD-endo, for women
suffering from complex endometriosis. Research in caring
for this patient group is sparse, and the women are
known to have unmet needs (33). The thematic analysis
provided detailed information about changes in the
women’s reaction to the condition enabled by GSD-endo:
becoming less lonely with the condition, establishing a
meaningful relationship with HCPs, gaining personal and
disease-specific knowledge that facilitated new behaviours and initiated a process of acceptance. A quantitative inventory suggested that EHP-30 identified changes
among the women which did not seem to be just as convincing for PAM.
The fact that the women felt isolated and alone with
endometriosis was also found in a narrative review on
the social and psychological impact of living with
endometriosis (5), where some women reported to be
reluctant to talk to others about their situation. Loneliness has been described due to lack of acceptance from
partners (34). The women in our study had worries in
relation to fertility, sexuality, partner and workability.
Emotional distress was also a pervasive theme in the
review by Cully et al. (5). Further, ‘uncertainty’ was
found to impact on the women’s lives both pre- and
post-diagnosis due to uncertainty in relation to diagnostic
delay, ‘symptomatic uncertainty’ due to the variability of
symptoms and ‘trajectory uncertainty’ related to the
future especially regarding fertility (5).
Not receiving support from the healthcare system was
reported in a qualitative study where the women mostly
highlighted negative experiences with HCPs who did not

Quantitative results – questionnaires
EHP 30. Results of the EHP 30 questionnaires are presented in Table 4 and Fig. 2. In general, all dimensions
appeared to improve from baseline to 2 weeks after the
last GSD conversation, and in an overall perspective, this
appeared to be maintained after 12 months except for
the dimension ‘Self-image’.
PAM. The results from the PAM questionnaire are presented in Table 4. The median delta change was one level
in a positive direction after two weeks suggesting an
increased ability in the women’s knowledge, skills and
confidence in managing own health. However, four out
of the ten women had the same scores at level one
before and after the GSD-endo conversations. After
12 months (data not shown), two out of the four women

Table 4 EHP 30 and PAM scores at baseline and 2 weeks after the
last conversation (medians, interquartile ranges and median changes)

EHP 30*
Pain
Control and
powerlessness
Emotional
well-being
Social support
Self-image
PAM

Baseline
(N = 10)

Two weeks after last
conversations (N = 10)

Median
change

55 (49–60)
73 (68–82)

41 (40–51)
54 (47–73)

14
19

60 (45–69)

44 (39–52)

17

78 (66–88)
67 (54–75)
1 (1–1.75)

56 (42–72)
42 (35–50)
2 (1–2.75)

22
25
+1

*All EHP 30 values are rounded up to nearest whole number.
© 2019 Nordic College of Caring Science

About me as a person not only the disease

1023

Figure 2 EHP dimensions at baseline, 2 weeks and 12 months for each participant.

prioritise their concerns or took them seriously (35). A
recent Swedish study found women’s encounters with
HCP’s of mixed character comprising experiences of confidence and understanding but also mistrust and humiliation (36). A qualitative study of clinicians’ perceptions of
women’s experiences with endometriosis and of psychosocial care for this group found that most clinicians
assessed themselves not adequately trained to understand
and provide psychosocial care for this group and many
found it not necessary to do so (37).

© 2019 Nordic College of Caring Science

A key to action seemed to be the new personal knowledge provided by the women’s insight into previous
behaviour regarding the disease gained through the
preparatory GSD-endo sheets and the following conversations. Person-centred interventions with a holistic
approach have been requested to support this group in
handling the negative social and psychological impact of
endometriosis and its treatment (5). Patient-centred
endometriosis care and especially areas such as ‘continuity’, ‘respect’ and ‘information’ has been associated with

1024

S.M. Simonsen et al.

better HRQOL (38). Previously, it has been stated that in
particular nurses are well-suited to deliver appropriate
care to this group (39). Even though this statement was
presented more than 10 years ago, it is still relevant
today. We believe that supporting women’s abilities to
cope with endometriosis and enabling integration of life
and disease, based on personal values and preferences,
remain key tasks for nurses. Positive coping strategies
focusing on the problem or on emotions in relation to
endometriosis were in a recent review found to be associated with better mental health (40).
A recent study stated information, communication and
education to be important areas in patient-centred
endometriosis care (41). Our findings support disease and
person-specific education to be an important empowering
factor and necessary for the women to self-manage their
condition. In our study, the women gained personal and
disease-specific knowledge which in turn enabled them
to articulate their challenges to HCPs, family members
and colleagues, which was found to be an important
empowering process. The women described gaining control during the GSD conversations which is in line with
the overall purpose of GSD. The method was developed
to support an empowerment process in which patients
develop life skills enabling them to self-manage their disease in daily life (16). The women describe many examples of newly developed skills such as, being able to
prioritise between problems, gaining the ability to communicate difficult feelings, increasing acceptance and
developing their problem-solving skills. The latter was
also an important outcome of GSD targeted women with
gynaecological cancer (26).
Research in Self-Determination Theory has found that
humans have three innate psychological needs: competence, autonomy and being able to create relationships
with others. Thus, satisfaction of these needs leads to
enhanced mental health and self-motivation (42). The
women in our study described GSD-endo to enhance
their sense of autonomy by addressing their individual
needs. They developed life skills enabling them to relate
to their significant others, and due to insight and education, they increased their own competence in handling
the disease. Taken together, GSD-endo supported all
three innate needs and increased the women’s mental
health and self-motivated problem-solving strategies.
Our findings indicate that GSD is a feasible method in
providing person-centred support for out-patients with
endometriosis but needs further testing in a randomised
trial. In this pilot study, GSD empowered the women by
facilitating the development of life skills. To our best
knowledge, many methods exist that address elements of
personal goal setting, shared decision-making and targeted support of frail individuals. But none of these combines theories and practice like GSD. GSD is unique
because of the person-centred approach and, at the same

time, impact on HCP’s mindset and understanding of the
patient’s individual needs.
Multidisciplinary approaches have been described as
mandatory to reduce the impact of the endometriosis on
QOL and sexual function (43). Our study indicates that
nurses play a more active role in the team when they
apply GSD to support women with complex endometriosis to cope with symptoms such as pain which is associated with reduced QOL, anxiety and depression (7).
This is in line with the before-and-after assessment
especially on HRQOL (EHP 30) suggesting benefits of
GSD-endo; however, this should be confirmed by a randomised trial. The EHP-30 scores in our study are in general higher (worse) than in an American cross-sectional
study (44) probably because the women in our study
were screened to have complex endometriosis.

Strengths of the study
Based on the expected needs of the patients, we chose
GSD, which has shown benefit in other settings. We
applied a qualitative analysis to show the potential effects
of GSD in endometriosis. And we applied quantitative
data to underpin these. Several researchers were
involved in the analysis and interpretation of data contributing to different perspectives on the findings.

Limitations of the study
The nurses delivering this intervention had more than
20 years of experience. Their clinical experience may have
affected the women’s experience of GSD-endo, and therefore, the results may not be generalisable to a different setting with less experienced nurses. On the other hand, very
experienced nurses have been found to be reluctant to
apply evidence-based methods (45) but this was not the
case in our study. One woman was referred to a psychologist and not interviewed. She was satisfied with the conversations, and they revealed her need for referral. If she
had been interviewed, it might have contributed with
other perspectives. We present few quantitative data collected before and after without blinding or a control group.
We do not know if or how the women would have
improved their scores over time without GSD-endo.

Perspectives
GSD-endo has the potential to benefit women with complex endometriosis, but this needs testing in a randomised trial where causality can be established. Since
this study was completed, GSD-endo has been developed
in a digital version where reflection sheets are hosted on
the Public Danish eHealth Portal, Sundhed.dk. The conversations can now be delivered face-to-face, on the telephone or supported by video. A blended learning
© 2019 Nordic College of Caring Science

About me as a person not only the disease
certification programme in GSD has been developed. All
these new features likely increase the feasibility of
nationwide tests and implementations of GSD in several
settings including complex endometriosis (www.guidedse
lfdetermination.eu).

1025

psychological therapy after two conversations because of
a complex life situation with other challenges than
endometriosis.

Conflict of interests
All authors declare no conflict of interests.

Conclusions
Guided Self-Determination supported the women in
developing self-management skills in relation to
endometriosis and its symptoms. This was due to insight
into their own needs and behaviours and their gained
knowledge about the disease itself. The before-and-after
assessment on EHP 30 suggested benefits, but this needs
confirmation in a randomised trial.

Author contributions

Acknowledgements

Ethical approval

Thanks to the participating women who have given us
valuable feedback on their experiences and to the nurses
for providing conversations and collecting questionnaires,
especially Helle Ring Knudsen. Finally, thanks to MD
Andreas Henriksen for statistical assistance.

The project was notified and approved by the Danish
Data Protection Agency (JNR.2013-41-2427). According
to Danish law it was exempted from approval by The
Danish Ethics Committee. The study was conducted in
accordance with the Helsinki Declaration. Continuously
we had increased awareness of women in need of support from a psychologist. One woman was referred to
psychological therapy after two conversations because of
a complex life situation with other challenges than
endometriosis.

Ethical approval
The project was notified and approved by the Danish
Data Protection Agency (JNR.2013-41-2427). According
to Danish law, it was exempted from approval by The
Danish Ethics Committee. The study was conducted in
accordance with the Helsinki Declaration. Continuously,
we had increased awareness of women in need of support from a psychologist. One woman was referred to

References
1 Kennedy S, Bergqvist A, Chapron C,
D’Hooghe T, Dunselman G, Greb R,
Hummelshoj L, Prentice A, Saridogan
E. ESHRE guideline for the diagnosis
and treatment of endometriosis. Hum
Reprod 2005; 20: 2698–704.
2 Meuleman C, Vandenabeele B,
Fieuws S, Spiessens C, Timmerman D,
D’Hooghe T. High prevalence of
endometriosis in infertile women with
normal ovulation and normospermic
partners. Fertil Steril 2009; 92: 68–74.
3 Barbara G, Facchin F, Buggio L,
Somigliana E, Berlanda N, Kustermann A, Vercellini P. What is known
and unknown about the association
between endometriosis and sexual
functioning: a systematic review of

© 2019 Nordic College of Caring Science

SMS, CS, DH and VZ designed the study. CS conducted
interviews, the focus group interview was conducted by
a communication consultant. SMS, CS and MLO analyzed data. All authors have contributed to writing the
article and approved the final version.

Funding
The study was funded by The Gynecological Department,
Copenhagen University Hospital, Rigshospitalet.

the literature. Reprod Sci 2017; 24:
1566–76.
4 Ramin-Wright A, Kohl Schwartz AS,
Geraedts K, Rauchfuss M, Wolfler
MM, Haeberlin F, von Orelli S, Eberhard M, Imthurn B, Imesch P, Fink
D, Leeners B. Fatigue – a symptom
in endometriosis. Hum Reprod 2018;
33: 1459–65. [Epub ahead of print].
5 Culley L, Law C, Hudson N, Denny
E, Mitchell H, Baumgarten M, RaineFenning N. The social and psychological impact of endometriosis on
women’s lives: a critical narrative
review. Hum Reprod Update 2013; 19:
625–39.
6 Gambadauro P, Carli V, Hadlaczky
G. Depressive symptoms among
women with endometriosis: a systematic review and meta-analysis.

Am J Obstet Gynecol 2019; 220: 230–
41.
7 Lagana AS, La Rosa VL, Rapisarda
AMC, Valenti G, Sapia F, Chiofalo B,
Rossetti D, Ban Frangez H, Vrtacnik
Bokal E, Vitale SG. Anxiety and
depression
in
patients
with
endometriosis: impact and management challenges. Int J Womens Health
2017; 9: 323–30.
8 Lagana AS, Condemi I, Retto G, Muscatello MR, Bruno A, Zoccali RA, Triolo
O, Cedro C. Analysis of psychopathological comorbidity behind the common symptoms and signs of
endometriosis. Eur J Obstet Gynecol
Reprod Biol 2015; 194: 30–3.
9 Nnoaham KE, Hummelshoj L, Webster P, d’Hooghe T, de Cicco NF, de
Cicco NC, Jenkinson C, Kennedy SH,

1026

S.M. Simonsen et al.

Zondervan KT. Impact of endometriosis on quality of life and work productivity: a multicenter study across
ten countries. Fertil Steril 2011; 96:
366–73.
10 Marinho MCP, Magalhaes TF, Fernandes LFC, Augusto KL, Brilhante
AVM, Bezerra L. Quality of life in
women with endometriosis: an integrative review. J Womens Health
2018; 27: 399–408.
11 Simoens S, Dunselman G, Dirksen C,
Hummelshoj L, Bokor A, Brandes I,
Brodszky V, Canis M, Colombo G l,
DeLeire T, Falcone T, Graham B, Halis
G, Horne A, Kanj O, Kjer J j, Kristensen J, Lebovic D, Mueller M, Vigano P, Wullschleger M, D’Hooghe T.
The burden of endometriosis: costs and
quality of life of women with
endometriosis and treated in referral
centres. Hum Reprod 2012; 27: 1292–9.
12 Verket NJ, Uhlig T, Sandvik L,
Andersen MH, Tanbo TG, Qvigstad
E. Health-related quality of life in
women with endometriosis, compared with the general population
and women with rheumatoid arthritis. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 2018;
97: 1339–48.
13 Zoffmann V, Kirkevold M. Relationships and their potential for change
developed in difficult type 1 diabetes.
Qual Health Res 2007; 17: 625–38.
14 Zoffmann V, Kirkevold M. Life versus disease in difficult diabetes care:
conflicting perspectives disempower
patients and professionals in problem
solving. Qual Health Res 2005; 15:
750–65.
15 Zoffmann V, Harder I, Kirkevold M.
A person-centered communication
and reflection model: sharing decision-making in chronic care. Qual
Health Res 2008; 18: 670–85.
16 Zoffmann V, Kirkevold M. Realizing
empowerment in difficult diabetes
care: a guided self-determination
intervention. Qual Health Res 2012;
22: 103–18.
17 Weis J, Zoffmann V, Egerod I.
Enhancing person-centred communication in NICU: a comparative thematic analysis. Nurs Crit Care 2015;
20: 287–98.
18 Finderup J, Bjerre T, Soendergaard
A, Nielsen ME, Zoffmann V. Developing life skills in haemodialysis
using the guided self-determination

method: a qualitative study. J Ren
Care 2016; 42: 83–92.
19 Jorgensen R, Hansson L, Zoffmann
V. Changes in persistent delusions in
schizophrenia using guided self-determination: a single case study.
Issues Ment Health Nurs 2012; 33:
293–300.
20 Jorgensen R, Licht RW, Lysaker PH,
Munk-Jorgensen P, Buck KD, Jensen
SO, Hansson L, Zoffmann V. Effects
on cognitive and clinical insight with
the use of Guided Self-Determination in outpatients with schizophrenia: A randomized open trial. Eur
Psychiatry 2015; 30: 655–63.
21 Linnet Olesen M, Hansson H, Ottesen B, Thranov IR, Thisted LB, Zoffmann V. The psychosocial needs of
gynaecological cancer survivors: A
framework for the development of a
complex intervention. Eur J Oncol
Nurs 2015; 19: 349–58.
22 Olesen ML, Duun-Henriksen AK,
Hansson H, Ottesen B, Andersen KK,
Zoffmann V. A person-centered
intervention targeting the psychosocial needs of gynecological cancer
survivors: a randomized clinical trial.
J Cancer Surviv 2016; 10: 832–41.
23 Zoffmann V, Lauritzen T. Guided
self-determination improves life skills
with type 1 diabetes and A1C in randomized controlled trial. Patient Educ
Couns 2006; 64: 78–86.
24 Zoffmann V, Vistisen D, Due-Christensen M. Flexible guided self-determination intervention for younger
adults with poorly controlled Type 1
diabetes, decreased HbA1c and psychosocial distress in women but not
in men: a real-life RCT. Diabet Med
2015; 32: 1239–46.
25 Husted GR, Esbensen BA, Hommel
E, Thorsteinsson B, Zoffmann V.
Adolescents developing life skills for
managing type 1 diabetes: a qualitative, realistic evaluation of a guided
self-determination-youth intervention. J Adv Nurs 2014; 70: 2634–50.
26 Thisted LB, Zoffmann V, Olesen ML.
Labeled as lucky: contradictions
between what women and healthcare professionals experience regarding the need for help after the early
stages of gynecological cancer. Support Care Cancer 2019. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s00520-019-04882-2 [Epub
ahead of print].

27 Braun V, Clarke V. Using thematic
analysis in psychology. Qual Res Psychol 2006; 3: 77–101.
28 Jones G, Kennedy S, Barnard A,
Wong J, Jenkinson C. Development
of an endometriosis quality-of-life
instrument:
The
Endometriosis
Health Profile-30. Obstet Gynecol
2001; 98: 258–64.
29 Jones G, Jenkinson C, Kennedy S.
Evaluating the responsiveness of the
Endometriosis Health Profile Questionnaire: the EHP-30. Qual Life Res
2004; 13: 705–13.
30 Hibbard JH, Stockard J, Mahoney
ER, Tusler M. Development of the
Patient Activation Measure (PAM):
conceptualizing and measuring activation in patients and consumers.
Health Serv Res 2004; 39(4 Pt 1):
1005–26.
31 Stull DE, Wasiak R, Kreif N, Raluy
M, Colligs A, Seitz C, Gerlinger C.
Validation of the SF-36 in patients
with endometriosis. Qual Life Res
2014; 23: 103–17.
32 Nutbeam D. Health promotion glossary. Health Promot 1986; 1: 113–27.
33 As-Sanie S, Black R, Giudice LC,
Gray Valbrun T, Gupta J, Jones B,
Laufer MR, Milspaw AT, Missmer
SA, Norman A, Taylor RN, Wallace
K, Williams Z, Yong PJ, Nebel RA.
Assessing research gaps and unmet
needs in endometriosis. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 2019; 221: 86–94.
34 Strzempko Butt F, Chesla C. Relational patterns of couples living with
chronic
pelvic
pain
from
endometriosis. Qual Health Res 2007;
17: 571–85.
35 Moradi M, Parker M, Sneddon A,
Lopez V, Ellwood D. Impact of
endometriosis on women’s lives: a
qualitative study. BMC Womens Health
2014; 14: 123.
36 Hallstam A, Stalnacke BM, Svensen
C, Lofgren M. Living with painful
endometriosis - A struggle for coherence. A qualitative study. Sex Reprod
Health 2018; 17: 97–102.
37 Young K, Fisher J, Kirkman M. Clinicians’ perceptions of women’s experiences of endometriosis and of
psychosocial care for endometriosis.
Aust N Z J Obstet Gynaecol 2017; 57:
87–92.
38 Apers S, Dancet EAF, Aarts JWM,
Kluivers KB, D’Hooghe TM, Nelen

© 2019 Nordic College of Caring Science

About me as a person not only the disease
W. The association between experiences with patient-centred care and
health-related quality of life in
women with endometriosis. Reprod
Biomed Online 2018; 36: 197–205.
39 Denny E. Women’s experience of
endometriosis. J Adv Nurs 2004; 46:
641–8.
40 Zarbo C, Brugnera A, Frigerio L,
Malandrino C, Rabboni M, Bondi E,
Compare A. Behavioral, cognitive,
and emotional coping strategies of
women with endometriosis: a critical
narrative review. Arch Womens Ment
Health 2018; 21: 1–13.
41 Geukens EI, Apers S, Meuleman C,
D’Hooghe TM, Dancet EAF. Patient-

© 2019 Nordic College of Caring Science

centeredness and endometriosis: Definition, measurement, and current
status. Best Pract Clin Obstet Gynaecol
2018; 50: 11–7.
42 Ryan RM, Deci EL. Self-determination theory and the facilitation of
intrinsic motivation, social development, and well-being. Am Psychol
2000; 55: 68–78.
43 Vitale SVL, Vitagliano A, Noventa M,
Lagana FM, Ardizzone A, Rapisarda
AMC, Terzic MM, Terzic S, Lagana AS.
Sexual function and quality of life in
patients affected by deep infiltrating
endometriosis: current evidence and
future perspectives. J Endometr Pelvic
Pain Disord 2017; 9: 270–4.

1027

44 Soliman AM, Coyne KS, Zaiser E,
Castelli-Haley J, Fuldeore MJ. The
burden of endometriosis symptoms
on health-related quality of life
in women in the United States:
a cross-sectional study. J Psychosom Obstet Gynaecol 2017; 38:
238–48.
45 Jorgensen R, Christiansen J, Nissen
HB, Kristoffersen K, Zoffmann V.
The deadlock of saying "That is what
we already do!" A thematic analysis
of mental healthcare professionals’
reactions to using an evidence-based
intervention. J Psychiatr Ment Health
Nurs 2019; 26: 39–48.

Copyright of Scandinavian Journal of Caring Sciences is the property of Wiley-Blackwell and
its content may not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the
copyright holder's express written permission. However, users may print, download, or email
articles for individual use.

