International Journal of

Molecular Sciences
Review

Endometriosis: Epidemiology, Classification, Pathogenesis,
Treatment and Genetics (Review of Literature)
Beata Smolarz 1, * , Krzysztof Szyłło 2
1

2

*

and Hanna Romanowicz 1

Laboratory of Cancer Genetics, Department of Pathology, Polish Mother’s Memorial Hospital Research
Institute, Rzgowska 281/289, 93-338 Lodz, Poland; hanna-romanowicz@wp.pl
Department of Operative Gynaecology and Oncological Gynaecology, Polish Mother’s Memorial Hospital
Research Institute, Rzgowska 281/289, 93-338 Lodz, Poland; kszyllo@o2.pl
Correspondence: smolbea@wp.pl; Tel.: +48-42-271-1290

Abstract: Endometriosis is a “mysterious” disease and its exact cause has not yet been established.
Among the etiological factors, congenital, environmental, epigenetic, autoimmune and allergic
factors are listed. It is believed that the primary mechanism of the formation of endometriosis
foci is retrograde menstruation, i.e., the passage of menstrual blood through the fallopian tubes
into the peritoneal cavity and implantation of exfoliated endometrial cells. However, since this
mechanism is also observed in healthy women, other factors must also be involved in the formation
of endometriosis foci. Endometriosis is in many women the cause of infertility, chronic pain and
the deterioration of the quality of life. It also represents a significant financial burden on health
systems. The article presents a review of the literature on endometriosis—a disease affecting women
throughout the world.



Keywords: endometriosis; diagnostic; treatment; biomarkers; genes

Citation: Smolarz, B.; Szyłło, K.;
Romanowicz, H. Endometriosis:
Epidemiology, Classification,
Pathogenesis, Treatment and Genetics
(Review of Literature). Int. J. Mol. Sci.
2021, 22, 10554. https://doi.org/
10.3390/ijms221910554
Academic Editor: Kanako Hayashi
Received: 26 August 2021
Accepted: 26 September 2021
Published: 29 September 2021

Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional affiliations.

Copyright: © 2021 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).

1. Endometriosis—History
Endometriosis is defined as the presence of the endometrium outside the uterine cavity
accompanied by chronic inflammation. This disease was first described by Daniel Shroen
in 1690 in the work “Disputatio Inauguralis Medica de Ulceribus Ulceri”. The symptoms of
this disease were presented by Arthur Duff in 1769 [1].
The first appearances in the literature regarding the pathogenesis of endometriosis
appeared in the second half of the nineteenth century. This condition was described by
Karl von Rokitansky in 1860, who defined it as the presence of an active endometrium
outside the uterine cavity [2].
In 1882, Von Recklinghausen suggested the name adenomyoma and by the end of the
nineteenth century, several more authors had described this disease.
In 1908, a monograph was published by T.S. Cullen on adenomyosis [3].
Cullen was the first to describe the two main symptoms of adenomyosis: prolonged
menstrual bleeding and severe pain. He believed that endometrial tissue came from the
remains of Müller’s ducts [3,4].
In 1870, the German anatomist, physiologist and pathologist Heinrich Wilhelm
Waldeyer was the first to put forward the theory of metaplasia.
One of the outstanding doctors of the nineteenth century, Iwanhofen in 1898 was the author of the thesis that endometrial tissue arises from metaplasia of the peritoneal epithelium.
According to Meyer’s research from 1903, metaplasia would promote the inclusion of
the epithelium into the lining, under the influence of hormonal and inflammatory factors.
In Poland, Leonard Lorentowicz was the first to describe endometriosis in Polish
Gynecology in 1937 in an article entitled: “On the pathogenesis of intrauterine adenomatosis in the peritoneal cavity (endometriosis peritonealis). Contribution to the etiology of
abdominal pregnancy” [4].

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, 10554. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms221910554

https://www.mdpi.com/journal/ijms

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, 10554

2 of 29

Until the 1920s, endometriosis was considered a benefactory hyperplasia disease
occurring under various names: cystadenoma, cystic fibrosis, adenomyoma.
In 1927, J.A. Sampson was the first to introduce the term “endometriosis” into medical
nomenclature. According to the researcher, the cause of the disease is “retrogradea menstruation” or retrograde transport of menstrual blood with the consequent implantation of
exfoliated endometrial mucosa cells within the peritoneal cavity [5,6].
Starting from the first theory of J.A. Sampson, as the years passed and research continued, new theories were formed that attempted to explain the phenomenon of endometriosis.
Despite the passage of such a long period of time and much scientific research, Sampson’s
theory is still dominant among other hypotheses regarding the etiopathogenesis of endometriosis. It has still not been possible to fully explain why the retrograde transport of
menstrual blood, which occurs in nearly 90% of women of childbearing age, only leads to
the survival of endometrial tissue outside the uterine cavity in a minority of women [7].
All the theories were sorted out by K. Schweppe in 1984 into three main groups:
-

-

-

First group—includes theories of endometrial transplantation by retrograde menstrual
blood as well as mechanical transplantation (e.g., during surgery), and transport by
lymphatic and blood vessels.
Second group—these are theories of the development of endometriosis in situ; that
is, from local tissue from the remains of cells or tissues of the fetal embryo or the
genitourinary system. The research of Waldeyer, Russell, Reclinghausen, Gebhard
and Meyer and Novak contributed to the above theories [4].
Third group—includes Levander’s 1941 inductive theory. According to her, exfoliated
endometrial cells enter the peritoneal cavity and stimulate its epithelium to transform
into endometrial tissue [7–9].

Table 1 presents the main theories of endometriosis emerging over years of research
on this disease [10,11].
Table 1. Theories of the formation of endometriosis—a historical outline.
Name of the
Investigator

Year

Theory

Recklinghausen
Cullen

1885
1896

Iwanhofen

1898

Meyer

1903

Pick
Sampson
Halban
Navrital i Kramer

1905
1927
1924
1936

Javert

1949

Mc Weigh
Weed i wsp
Malick

1955
1980
1982

from Wolff wires
from Müller cables
metaplasia theory—the assumption of the theory is the existence of cells capable of
differentiating in the endometrium, and being precursors of the epithelium
of the pelvic peritoneum
metaplasia theory—the assumption of the theory is the existence of cells capable of
differentiating in the endometrium, and being precursors of the mesodermal epithelium
of the ovary
metaplasia theory; regarding the sexual epithelium of the ovary
“retrograde menstruation”
endometrial elements can enter the peritoneal cavity by the blood or lymphatic route
vascular spread
a combination of implantation theory, transport by the blood and lymphatic routes, as
well as the theory of direct penetration of the endometrium through the uterine muscle
from the cells of the radial wreath of the egg
failure of the immune system derived from the Müller ducts
congenital or acquired weakened fibrinolytic activity of the peritoneum

It is worth emphasizing that despite many years of research on endometriosis that
tried to explain its etiology and pathogenesis, it still remains an enigmatic disease.
2. Endometriosis—Epidemiology
Endometriosis is characterized by the presence of active foci of the endometrium
(glandular cells and stroma) or endometrial tissue (endometrioides; Gr. eides-similar)

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, 10554

3 of 29

occurring outside its cavity, that is, in the muscular layer of the uterus, other genitals and
their surroundings, and even in places distant from the genital organs of the body [12].
Endometrial foci outside the uterine cavity may appear, for example, in the peritoneal
cavity, ovaries, bladder or ureters [13]. The ectopic endometrium is functionally similar to
the eutopic endometrium.
Endometriosis is a benign, estrogen-dependent, gynecological disease; however, due
to the accompanying ailments and chronic nature, it is a very important medical, social
and economic problem.
Infertility is a relatively common symptom in patients with endometriosis. Up to
30% to 50% of women with endometriosis may experience infertility [14]. Endometriosis
can influence fertility in several ways: distorted anatomy of the pelvis, adhesions, scarred
fallopian tubes, inflammation of the pelvic structures, altered immune system functioning,
changes in the hormonal environment of the eggs, impaired implantation of a pregnancy,
and altered egg quality. Often, this infertility remains unexplained due to a delay in
diagnosis, causing significant levels of stress [15].
Endometriosis is a common gynecological disease in Poland and in the world [16].
This disease affects from 10–15% of women of reproductive age and 35–50% of women with
pelvic pain and/or infertility. However, it should be noted that there are also cases of patients with endometriosis after menopause, and it also happens in adolescent women [17].
The vast majority of cases of endometriosis occur in women between menarche and
menopause. The peak of the disease falls in the period between 25 and 45 years of age [18].
Literature data indicate that endometriosis is found in 0.1–53% of women operated
on laparoscopically or by laparotomy, of which 12–32% are women after diagnostic laparoscopy due to pelvic pain delays and 10–60% of the patient after diagnostic laparoscopy
due to disability [19–21].
Endometriosis in 7% of women is associated with their genetic predisposition in the
family. This disease was found in 2% of women undergoing tubal ligation and 17% of
women after surgery to remove the ovaries [22,23].
World literature also reports the occurrence of foci of endometriosis in fetuses [24].
There have been isolated cases of endometriosis in men around the world who have
been treated with hormones for prostate cancer [25].
The risk of developing endometriosis is the lowest in black women, the highest in
Asian women. Caucasian women have a higher risk of getting sick than black women [26].
Endometriosis is a problem of enormous importance not only from the medical and
social angles but also from an economic point of view. The annual costs of endometriosis
treatment in Europe range from €0.8 billion to €12.5 billion depending on the country and
are comparable to other chronic diseases such as diabetes [27].
Endometriosis has a significant negative impact on aspects of social life, family, and
sexual, educational and professional life [27–29]. Pain and the associated dysfunction of
the body worsen the quality of life and reduce professional productivity. In cases where
there is no clear cause or medication, the disease can be chronic and recurrent. Due to its
impact on sexuality and fertility, it can have a negative impact on partner relationships.
3. Endometriosis—Symptomatology
Endometriosis-related symptoms can affect a woman’s overall health and mental and
social well-being. It causes a significant deterioration in the quality of life [30,31]. In 66%
of women with endometriosis, the first symptoms of the disease appear before the age of
20 [32]. Symptoms of endometriosis include: gradually increasing acute premenstrual pain,
pelvic pain, pain in the sacral region of the spine, dysmenorrhea, painful ovulation, pain
during intercourse, pain when defecating, pain when urinating, pain radiating to the back,
abundant irregular menstruation, blood in the stool, diarrhea or constipation, infertility
and chronic fatigue [18,33].
Patients may also experience uncharacteristic accompanying symptoms such as subfebrile conditions, nausea, dizziness and headaches, symptoms of depression, anxiety,

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, 10554

4 of 29

hypoglycemia, rectal bleeding, hematuria during menstruation or susceptibility to infections and allergies.
The pain associated with endometriosis most often takes the form of painful menstruation. It precedes the appearance of bleeding; over time it intensifies and its location
concerns the lower abdomen and deeper pelvic areas. Pain can radiate to the sacral region. The pain can extend beyond the bleeding period and also be present throughout the
menstrual cycle. There is a hypothesis that the intensification of menstruation soreness
is associated with the involvement of the Douglas sinus and the formation of adhesions
in it [34].
Sometimes very advanced endometriosis may not cause any symptoms, and, paradoxically, small foci within the peritoneum can cause great pain. Intraperitoneal adhesions
or overgrowth of the fallopian gouges are the most common causes of the problem with
the treatment of endometriosis. Sometimes foci of endometriosis produce antibodies to
the eutopic endometrium, which can induce poor embryo implantation or spontaneous
abortions. Increased and profuse menstruation is one of the symptoms of endometriosis,
e.g., in adenomyosis (so-called internal endometriosis) [34].
Adenomyosis is defined as the occurrence of ectopic foci of the endometrium outside
the uterine cavity. Their effect is lower abdominal pain and abnormal menstrual bleeding.
Due to its significant similarity to endometriosis, adenomyosis has so far been classified as
endometriosis genitalis interna, in which endometrial foci are located within the muscle
membrane of the uterus. In recent years, the distinctiveness of this disease entity has been
proven, indicating differences in symptomatology, pathogenesis and treatment [35].
The cause of adenomyosis is still unknown. This disease usually resolves after
menopause. The only effective treatment for adenomyosis remains surgery.
The range of diagnosis of adenomyosis varies between 5% and 70% of patients. Adenomyosis is more common in multiparous women than in nulliparous women [36].
The average age of diagnosis of adenomyosis is between 40 and 50 years of age. However, this disease can occur in young women as well as after menopause. The pathogenesis
of adenomyosis remains a mystery.
In addition to typical ailments such as menstrual pain, pain during intercourse or pain
in the lower abdomen, there are also problems in partner relationships and symptoms of
depressed mood [37].
The time from the appearance of the first symptoms of the disease to the diagnosis is
up to 8 to 10 years [38].
Despite such frequent occurrence of this disease, the mechanism of its formation
remains unexplained, and a good marker of this disease has still not been discovered [39,40].
Deep infiltrating endometriosis (DIE) is defined as the presence of ectopic endometrial
tissue infiltration under the peritoneum, pelvic structure, and organ walls, including the
uterosacral ligaments, rectosigmoid colon, vagina, rectovaginal septum, bladder, ureter, and
lateral parametrium (LP). DIE may cause pelvic pain and thus negatively affect the function
of different structures. Studies indicate that women with DIE may have dysfunctions of
the pelvic floor muscles (PFMs) and lower limb muscles (LLMs). Pain was associated with
PFM hypertonia and difficulty in PFM relaxation [41].
The presence of lateral parametrial endometriosis (LPE) can be considered a reflection
of a more severe disease, ureteral stenosis and dilatation, and voiding dysfunctions, mainly
because of the involvement of the inferior hypogastric plexus. Patients with LPE reported
more frequent constipation and voiding symptoms [42]. Associations exist between LPE
and straining to void, the feeling of incomplete emptying, intermittency, and abnormal
residual urine and bladder outlet obstruction. LPE might stimulate sympathetic fibers
of the pelvic plexus, promoting an increase in urethral sphincter tone and thus leading
to different degrees of outlet obstruction. These findings emphasize the importance of
obtaining a focused history and objective evaluations of urinary and rectal function in
patients presenting with clinical or instrumental findings suggestive of DIE [42].

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, 10554

5 of 29

4. Risk Factors for Endometriosis
Risk Factors for Endometriosis Include:

•

•

•
•
•
•
•
•

Early menarche—epidemiological studies analyzing the cycle of women with endometriosis have shown that the early first cycle (before the age of 11) is associated
with the risk of endometriosis [43–46],
Shorter than 27-day genital cycles, genital defects, including hymen overgrowth or
narrowing of the cervical canal [47]. The risk of endometriosis is increased in women
with short cycles, i.e., lasting less than 27 days, but is unrelated to the number of
bleeding days and the volume of menstruation [48],
Low BMI,
Small number of births,
Caucasian race,
Age 25–29,
Daily consumption of alcohol in the amount of at least 10 g per day,
Endometriosis is more often diagnosed in infertile women who are active smokers
and whose body mass index (BMI) is normal or low [49].

Interestingly, the latest data indicate that there is generally no association between
BMI and the incidence of endometriosis, but there has been a significant increase in the
incidence of endometriosis in obese women compared to women with normal body weight.
Obesity is also a risk factor for severe dysmenorrhea [50].
Diet plays a very important role in preventing the development of endometriosis. The
consumption of green vegetables and fresh fruits is considered to be the most beneficial [51].
They contain antioxidants, which play an important role in the proper functioning of
the immune system and the removal of free radicals. It is worth noting that the fiber
contained in vegetables interacts in the control of the intestinal bacterial flora and affects
hormonal balance.
Red meat exerts an antagonistic effect on the development of endometriosis compared
to vegetables and fruits. It is characterized by a high content of dioxins, hormones and fat,
increasing the concentration of estrogens [51].
In the latest research by the team of Yamamoto et al., an attempt was made to determine whether higher consumption of red meat, poultry, fish and seafood is associated
with the risk of laparoscopically confirmed endometriosis [52]. The study group consisted
of 81,908 women, and the observations covered the years from 1991 to 2013. Diet was
assessed using a properly prepared nutrition questionnaire administered every 4 years. It
was shown that respondents who reported eating > 2 servings/day of red meat had a 56%
higher risk of endometriosis compared to those consuming ≤ 1 serving/week. Women
who were classified in the category that consumed the most red meat were more likely to
have endometriosis. No association with poultry, fish, shellfish and egg consumption and
the risk of endometriosis was demonstrated [52].
A very important factor in the prevention of primary endometriosis is the maintenance
of an appropriate lifestyle, in which a significant part should be occupied by rest, movement
and physical activity [51].
5. Theories of the Formation of Endometriosis
So far, the pathomechanisms of the formation of endometriosis have not been definitively explained. The theory of Samson (“retrograde menstruation”) is more widespread. It
says that the foci of endometriosis arise as a result of the displacement of menstrual blood
into the peritoneal cavity through the fallopian tubes [5,6,53].
Literature data indicate that in 80% of women with open fallopian tubes there is a
retrograde outflow of menstrual blood, while endometriosis occurs only in some. This
suggests the presence of other factors determining the survival of endometrial cells in the
peritoneal cavity and their implantation [54].

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, 10554

6 of 29

Implantation in the peritoneum is explained by a local disorder of the mechanisms that
prevent adhesion. The consequence is an increased production of cytokine macrophages,
including tumor necrosis factor α (TNF-α) and interleukin [55].
Immune phenomena are important for explaining the possible pathomechanisms of
endometriosis foci, as studies indicate altered humoral and cellular immunity [56].
There are literature data on the statistically higher occurrence of certain immune
diseases together with endometriosis, for example, rheumatoid arthritis or hypothyroidism [57]. Another way of creating endometriosis foci was presented by Mayer’s
theory, which says that peritoneal cells are transformed into Muller-type cells under the
influence of hormones [58]. This theory is based on the assumption of the existence of
cells capable of differentiating in the endometrium and those cells being precursors of the
mesodermal epithelium of the ovary and the pelvic peritoneum. This theory is particularly
useful in explaining the existence of endometriosis in different regions of the body where
there is a mesothelium, e.g., pleural cavity [59,60].
The last theory is, in the light of two previous theories, that endogenous biochemical
and immunological factors responsible for the non-functioning of endometrial factors are
not being used for endometrial systems [61].
Endometriosis is also considered a chronic inflammatory process associated with
immune processes [62]. Disorders of the immune system accompany virtually every stage
of endometriosis development [63]. Macrophages are known to participate in recognizing
foreign cells and presenting them to T cells. An increased number of activated macrophages
with a reduced ability to phagocytose in the peritoneal cavity is characteristic of women
with endometriosis.
They secrete pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as IL-6, TNF-α, IL-1β and IL-8, in
increased amounts. Peritoneal macrophages in women with endometriosis have increased mRNA expression of the cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2), which resulted in increased
prostaglandin secretion [64]. Increased release of pro-inflammatory cytokines and reduced
production of anti-inflammatory factors from stromal, epithelial, smooth or immune cells
contribute to the initiation, development and progression of endometriosis [65] (Table 2).
Table 2. Cytokines associated with the development of endometriosis.
Immune Factor
TNF-α
NF-κB
MCP-1
IL-1β
IL-6
IL-10
IL-15

IL-16

IL-17A

Role in Endometriosis
Increasing vascular permeability and transformation of inflammatory factors in the peritoneal
cavity, which exacerbate peritonitis [66].
Controlling gene expression associated with immune response, cellular proliferation, and cytokine
production [67].
Stimulation of monocytes to migrate from peripheral blood to the peritoneal cavity to turn into
macrophages, leading to local inflammation [68].
Induction of VEGF and COX-2 expression leading to the progression of endometriosis [69].
In the tide to impair the function of NK cells (natural killer) by regulating the protein expression of
tyrosine phosphatase (SHP-2) in endometriosis [70].
In a mouse model with induced endometriosis, inhibition of IL-10 activity was found to be helpful
in reducing lesions [71].
In normal endometrial cells, ovarian steroid hormones control the production of IL-15.
Endometriotic cells in patients with endometriosis show higher concentrations of this cytokine in
endometrial patients [72].
Higher concentrations of IL-16 in women with endometriosis are associated with the development
of the disease by stimulating the secretion of IL-6, TNF-α and IL-1β. IL-16 polymorphisms are
associated with women’s susceptibility to the development of endometriosis and its severity [73].
In endometriosis, IL-17A is expressed in endometrial lesions, and therefore the inflammatory
environment of the peritoneal cavity of patients with endometriosis may be associated with the
production of IL-17A [74].

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, 10554

7 of 29

Table 2. Cont.
Immune Factor

IL-18

IL-27
IL-33

IL-37

Role in Endometriosis
IL-18 regulates the production of TNF-α and IL-8, acts as a potent angiogenic factor, and also
regulates the intercellular expression of adhesion molecule 1 through NFκB and may increase MMP
production. IL-18 is a major regulator of the immune response process in a wide range of cells that
decreases in both eutopic and ectopic endometrium in endometriosis [75].
IL-10 + Th17 stimulate the proliferation and implantation of ectopic lesions and accelerate the
progression of endometriosis, making IL-27 a key regulator in endometriotic lesions [76].
Member of the IL-1 family. IL-33 induces the synthesis of Th2-type cytokines through its orphan
receptor ST2. Increased IL-33 expression has been correlated with fibrotic disorders such as skin
scleroderma, liver and lung fibrosis, making IL-33 a key profibrotic mediator [77].
Increased levels of IL-37 expression in eutopic and ectopic endometrium in women with stage III-IV
ovarian endometriosis may be involved in inflammatory processes leading to endometriosis [78].

Another important factor in the pathogenesis of endometriosis is the disturbed balance
between type 1 (Th1) and type 2 (Th2) helper lymphocytes. Activated T cells differentiate
into Th1 lymphocytes and Th2 lymphocytes. The main function of Th1 is the production
of cytokines and the promotion of cell-type responses, whereas Th2 secretes cytokines
involved in the differentiation of B lymphocytes, suppression of cell-type responses, as well
as the severity of humoral type responses. According to literature data, Th2 lymphocytes
gain an advantage in women with endometriosis [79].
In women with endometriosis, reduced Natural Killer (NK) cell activity is found. This
is the main group of cells of the immune system responsible for the phenomenon of natural
cytotoxicity. Impaired function of NK cells reduces their ability to cleanse the peritoneal
cavity of endometrial elements after retrograde outflow of menstrual blood [80].
The formation of new vessels is a necessary condition for the development of the
ectopic endometrium, especially in the peritoneal microenvironment. Neo-angiogenesis is
accompanied by the formation of nerves, which may explain the pain in patients [81].
Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is responsible for the formation and growth
of new vessels. In women with endometriosis, elevated concentrations of VEGF in peritoneal fluid and its correlation with the stages of the disease were found [82].
At the moment, scientists agree that many factors are responsible for the formation of
endometriosis, and in particular genetic, immunological and environmental factors [83].
It has been confirmed that genetic conditions may be factors influencing the development of this disease. Currently, a group of genes that can enable the formation of
endometriosis is listed. These include the cytochrome P450 gene, estrogen, progesterone
and androgen receptor, as well as the p53 gene [83].
6. Types of Endometriosis
There are several types of endometriosis:

•
•

•
•

Ovarian endometriosis—occurs in the form of superficial lesions and as endometrial cysts,
Peritoneal—can occur in various forms: white raids on the peritoneum, peritoneal
defects, red, brown, black-blue and black foci, colorless bright vesicles and focal
dilated blood vessels and petechiae,
Deep infiltrating endometriosis—DIE,
Endometriosis of other locations.

The three most typical types of endometriosis are peritoneal endometriosis, ovarian
cysts (chocolate cysts) and nodules of deeply infiltrating endometriosis in the gut or
vaginal–rectal septum [84].
Peritoneal endometriosis can occur in the form of intraperitoneal and sub-peritoneal.
Foci of endometriosis within the peritoneum are found in 15–50% of all women diagnosed
with endometriosis [85]. The best diagnostic method for detecting these changes is to
recognize them during laparoscopic surgery [86].

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, 10554

8 of 29

Ovarian endometriosis occurs in 2–10% of women of reproductive age and 50% of
patients treated for infertility [87]. Ovarian endometriosis is one of the most common
localizations of this condition.
Deep infiltrating endometriosis is characterized by the fact that endometrioid changes
can reach deep into the extraperitoneal space and occupy various pelvic organs such as the
bladder, ureters, large intestine, sacro-uterine ligaments or the vagina. The pathomechanism of DIE is not clearly defined.
7. Classifications of Endometriosis
In order to assess the location and severity of the disease, many divisions and classifications have been proposed.
According to Sampson [88], we will divide it into:
-

Internal endometriosis affecting the uterine muscle
External endometriosis occurring outside the uterine muscle

Divisions of endometriosis by location were developed according to the classification
of Martius and Kistner [89,90] (Table 3).
Table 3. Types of divisions of endometriosis by location.
According to the Classical Classification of Martius

- endometriosis genitalis interna (adenomyosis) is present in
the uterus or the Fallopian tube
- endometriosis genitalis externa (in the remaining parts of the
reproductive organ)
- endometriosis extragenitalis (endometriotic lesions are
present outside the reproductive organs)

According to Kistner’s Classification
1. Overlapping peritoneal endometriosis
Ovaries
serous membrane of the uterus
uterine ligaments
Fallopian tubes
large intestine, thin intestine, appendix
2. Retroperitoneal endometriosis
inguinal regio
neck, vagina, vulva, perineum
drainage pathways
pleural and lungs
skin, skeletal muscles, limbs

Based on the histological classification according to Brosens (1993), we can distinguish
types of endometriosis [91]:
1.
2.

Mucosal type (occurs in endometrial cysts of the ovary),
Operitoneal type (exhibits multi-focus and morphological diversity)
-

3.

early, active, glandular or follicular lesions,
advanced, black, wrinkled changes,
white fibrotic lesions,

Glandular type (the main element is fibrous-muscular tissue and concerns deeply
infiltrating endometriosis).

Among the many divisions of endometriosis according to the extent and severity of
lesions, the division developed by the American Fertility Association (AFS) is the most
commonly used. The American Society of Reproductive Medicine distinguishes four stages
of endometriosis, where stage I and II are fairly mild types, and stages III and IV are
advanced disease [92,93]. Currently, there is a division corrected by AFS in 1985.
The classification developed by the American Society of Reproductive Medicine
(ASRM), based on the results of laparoscopy or laparotomy, it is the most common system
used in clinical practice. The most important goal of classifying and determining the
severity of endometriosis is to propose an effective treatment plan for it [94].
The ENZIAN scale in deeply infiltrating endometriosis is a descriptive scale, considering both the existence of the lesion and the depth of the invasion. In the ENZIAN
classification, the location of foci was assigned to separate anatomical compartments [95].

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, 10554

9 of 29

-

Compartment A—foci located in the vagina and the rectovaginal septum,
Compartment B—foci located in the sacro-uterine ligaments up to the pelvic walls,
Compartment C—foci located in the sigmoid colon and rectum.

This classification also describes the foci of the ectopic endometrium depending on
the place of their occurrence as:
FA—adenomyosis,
FB—urinary bladder endometriosis,
FU—ureter endometriosis,
FI—endometriosis of the bowel wall above the sigmoid colon,
FO—infiltration of other anatomical structures, e.g., abdominal integuments.
Endometriosis occurring outside the pelvis is a rare phenomenon. However, literature
data provide information on respiratory endometriosis or pericardial endometriosis or
endometriosis in a scar after surgery with laparotomy access [96,97].
8. Diagnostics
Histopathological examination clearly allows for the diagnosis of endometriosis. However, a good medical history, gynaecological examination with specula, two-handed examination, additional diagnostic tests using imaging techniques, laparoscopy and biochemical
tests are helpful in the initial diagnosis of the disease.
The basic examination in the diagnosis of endometriosis is an ultrasound examination [98]. Ultrasound examination (ultrasonography, USG) is helpful in the diagnosis of
endometrial cysts of the ovary and of congenital defects of the reproductive organs favoring
the retrograde outflow of menstrual blood into the peritoneal cavity [99]. In the case of
endometriosis infiltrating the urinary bladder or the large intestine, it is justified to perform
cystoscopy, colonorectoscopy and transrectal ultrasound examination [99].
In the case of deeply infiltrating endometriosis, the Rectal Water Contrast Transvaginal
Sonography (RWC TVS) is also appropriate. The water contrast allows us to detect foci in
the intestinal area and assess their progression (Figure 1).

Figure 1. Intestinal endometriosis (from Department of Operative Gynaecology and Oncological
Gynaecology, Polish Mother’s Memorial Hospital Research Institute, Lodz, Poland).

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, 10554

10 of 29

Deeply infiltrating endometriosis is characterized by the infiltration of endometrial
cells > 5 mm below the surface of the peritoneum [100]. Profound lesions mainly affect the
posterior pelvic compartment, including the rectovaginal septum, posterior vaginal vault,
utero sacral ligaments and anterior rectal wall, causing adhesions and distortions of pelvic
anatomy [101,102]. In addition to the classic DIE pain syndrome (characterized by dysmenorrhea, dyspareunia, chronic pelvic pain, dystrophy and dyschesia), profound changes
are associated with dysfunction of the pelvic organs and pelvic floor muscles (PFM) [103].
A series of events or a combination of factors may contribute to the development of nonrelaxing PFM in women with chronic pelvic pain, including direct or indirect (neuropathic)
pelvic floor muscle injury, pelvic pain symptoms and inflammation. Evaluation of PFM
by palpation or electromyography can cause pain, causing pelvic muscle spasm, which
can be a confounding factor. Transperineal ultrasound has been shown to be an important,
reliable and non-invasive tool for assessing pelvic floor morphometry [104,105]. Women
with DIE have a smaller area of the levator hiatal area (LHA), and dynamic maneuvers
with three-dimensional (3D) and four-dimensional (4D) transperineal ultrasound suggest
they have higher muscle tone and lower strength. [106] than those without DIE. In a 3D/4D
transperineal ultrasound examination, women with ovarian endometriosis and concomitant profound lesions appear to have increased PFM tone and decreased PFM strength
compared to women with isolated ovarian endometriosis [107]. Transperineal ultrasound
is a reliable and non-invasive tool for assessing pelvic floor morphometry [108]. Pelvic floor
hypertonic dysfunction is a complex condition, and the specific cause or event that triggers
this disorder is often not clearly identified [109]. A higher tone of PFM is associated with its
damage and innervation (i.e., surgery, trauma or endometriosis), musculoskeletal changes
(i.e., skeletal asymmetry), chronic pelvic pain syndromes and/or dyspareunia [110,111].
Moreover, this condition can also be attributed to abnormal learned pelvic floor activity
or poor activity acquired in adulthood, through constant voluntary urination or defecation,
or through sexual abuse [112]. The relationship between hypertonic disorder PFM and DIE
can be explained by two main mechanisms. First, women with ovarian endometriosis alone
tend to have less severity of pain symptoms than women with peritoneal endometriosis.
In addition, in DIE lesions, increased density of nerve fibers and the phenomenon of
perineural and intraneural invasion were clearly demonstrated [113]. Women affected by
DIE showed smaller LHA than women with isolated ovarian endometriosis. Hypertonic
dysfunction of PFM may be associated with pain symptoms (myofascial pain) and changes
in pelvic organ function in women with DIE. Indeed, the role of PFM is not only to support
the pelvic organs, but its contraction and relaxation are necessary for the proper functioning
of the intestines and bladder and to enable painless sexual intercourse. While hypotonic
pelvic floor disorders, such as pelvic organ prolapse, are often easily identified, symptoms
of hypertonic PFM disorders are often not well studied, making these disorders unreported
or misdiagnosed as other, better known concomitant conditions [109]. Because PFM
dysfunction can cause pain symptoms and pelvic organ dysfunction potentially resistant to
hormonal or surgical endometriosis therapy, transperineal ultrasound may enable a more
complete functional assessment in women with DIE, with the goal of achieving tailored
therapy, including pelvic floor rehabilitation.
It is also helpful to have a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) examination, but the
ultrasound examination is the basic tool in the diagnosis of this disease.
However, the gold standard in the diagnosis of endometriosis is laparoscopic surgery,
with simultaneous confirmation in histopathological examination [114].
The less frequent areas of endometriosis include the vaginal vault and cervix, which
is why examination with a speculum is an obligatory element of the gynaecological examination. Palpation can detect endometriosis in the area of the vaginal-rectal septum and the
sacro-uterine ligaments. A characteristic and frequently encountered feature in patients
with endometriosis is also uterine retroflexion, often forced by intraperitoneal adhesions.

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, 10554

11 of 29

9. Treatment
Treatment of endometriosis is a big medical problem due to the fact that this disease
is difficult to treat and is chronic in nature. Pharmacological, surgical or combination
treatment is possible.
Symptoms associated with the presence of foci of endometriosis are the main factor
determining the need to start treatment. These symptoms are pain complaints of varying
severity and location, and problems with getting pregnant. Women who notice abnormalities in their body report to the doctor, which allows them to apply a selected treatment
in advance. A big problem remains patients who, despite the occurrence of pain, report
late and therefore the disease, especially DIE, causes the involvement of other organs and
the need to perform extensive complicated surgical procedures. Pharmacological, surgical
and combination treatments are used to treat endometriosis [115]. In pharmacological
treatment, we distinguish between hormonal and symptomatic treatment. Currently, hormonal treatment is allowed, for three months without histopathological confirmation of
the disease. The choice of treatment is made depending on the age of the patient and her
procreative desires, the ailments present and the form of endometriosis. Proper diet and
lifestyle also play an important role.
9.1. Pharmacological Treatment
Drug treatment is used in women in their reproductive years. The goal of pharmacological treatment is to reduce or eliminate pain, inhibit further development and regression
of endometrial foci and restore fertility. Initiation of pharmacological treatment of endometriosis is possible only on the basis of a clinical exam without the need to confirm the
existence of the disease in laparoscopic examination (empirical therapy).
Pharmacotherapy may be part of the preparation for surgery, as well as a complementary procedure in the postoperative period. There are certain types of drugs that are used
in the treatment of endometriosis (Table 4).
Table 4. Groups of medicines used in the treatment of endometriosis.
Types of Drugs
1.

2.

3.
4.

non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
hormonal drugs:
progestogens
hormonal contraceptives,
danazol,
analogues and gonadoliberin (GnRH)–gonadoliberin agonists and
antagonists
selective progesterone receptor modulators
aromatase inhibitors

Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs inhibit the synthesis of prostaglandins, contribute to reducing the inflammatory process and resolve pain [114]. Complex estrogenprogestogen therapy can be used cyclically or continuously.
In hormone therapy of endometriosis, the following groups of drugs are used [116]:
Danazol—a derivative of the male sex hormone testosterone. It inhibits the secretion of
GnRH, causing a decrease in the secretion of LH and FSH by the pituitary gland. Therapy
is long-term (6–9 months) and is started on the scond day of the cycle. The drug has many
side effects. These include weight gain, fluid retention, breast reduction, oily skin and acne,
hot flashes, decreased voice timbre.
Gonadoliberin analogues are substances with a structure similar to GnRH, which
“deceive” the hypothalamus, causing a decrease in the production of real GnRH. This
results in a decrease in LH and FSH levels and a significant reduction in estrogen levels.
Therapy lasts at least 3–6 months. Side effects are caused by low estrogen levels. These

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, 10554

12 of 29

include loss of calcium from the bones leading to osteoporosis, vaginal dryness, decreased
libido, headaches, insomnia.
Progestogen preparations—contain progesterone derivatives, whose function is to
reduce the level of GnRH, and thus the levels of FSH, LH and estrogen. Therapy should be
used for at least 6 months. The most common side effects include fluid retention, weight
gain, breast tenderness, spotting and irregular bleeding from the genital tract.
Oral contraceptives (estrogen-progestogen preparations)—their action consists in
lowering the level of FSH and stabilizing the endometrium, which leads to a reduction
in pain.
An intrauterine device releasing levonorgestrel is a progesterone derivative. The
effect is the same as progestogen preparations. Recommended especially for women with
severe pain.
Aromatase inhibitors—the latest group of drugs used in the treatment of endometriosis. Their action takes advantage of the fact of specific behavior of endometriosis cells.
Foci of endometriosis, regardless of the ovaries, produce estrogens that cause an increase
in endometrial lesions. Aromatase inhibitors interrupt estrogen production in both endometriosis foci and ovaries, causing a significant reduction in estrogen levels. Side effects
are due to low estrogen levels. The most important of these is the significant loss of calcium from the bone causing osteoporosis. Others include loss of libido, vaginal dryness,
insomnia [116].
All recognized methods of pharmacological treatment have similar therapeutic effectiveness. They differ in the scope and speed of the appearance of side effects. There is still
an urgent need to develop new types of pharmacological therapies that will guarantee a
complete cure of patients without the occurrence of side effects.
The latest drug to be approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is elagolix,
a drug for the treatment of moderate to severe pain associated with endometriosis [117].
The results of a study in which about 1700 women with moderate or severe pain in
endometriosis participated played a part in the above decision. Doses of this drug—150 mg
once a day or 200 mg twice a day—significantly reduced the most common types of
endometrial pain: pelvic pain and sex-related pain. For a dose of 150 mg, the duration of
use of the drug is 24 months; for a dose of 200 mg duration is limited to 6 months, as the
drug causes a decrease in bone mineral density. The drug is taken orally [117].
Elagolix is a non-peptide GnRH (gonadotropin-releasing hormone) antagonist. Elagolix
enables dose-dependent reductions in estrogen levels and is effective in relieving moderate to severe endometriosis pain with long-lasting, sustained effects. As a GnRH antagonist, elagolix may also reduce bone mineral density through its estrogen reduction
mechanism [118].
As evidenced by literature data, although there is a risk of bone loss when elagolix is
used, the effect of elagolix on the long-term risk of fracture is minimal [119,120].
Results from the final model simulations indicate support for recommendations for
the use of elagolix at a dose of 150 mg q.d. for 24 months [121].
9.2. Surgical Treatment
In the case of surgical treatment, it can be sparing or radical. Sparing treatment applies
to adolescent patients and women of childbearing age planning to become pregnant.
Radical surgical treatment is carried out in patients who do not plan pregnancy or those
who continue to have pain despite the pharmacotherapy used.
Indications for surgical treatment of endometriosis are as follows:
-

pelvic pain,
infertility in endometriosis,
endometrial ovarian cysts.

Laparoscopy is the recommended surgical technique for the treatment of endometriosis, regardless of its stage [122]. The best therapeutic effects are achieved as a result of

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, 10554

13 of 29

the combination of surgical treatment with pharmacological treatment. Medications are
applied both before and after surgery.
Laparoscopy with the assistance of a robot is a viable method of resection of deeply infiltrating endometriosis, especially in the rectal-sigmoid region. In the case of endometriosis,
a mini-invasive laparoscopic or laparoscopic approach using a robot is strongly recommended [108]. The disadvantage of surgery, however, is that when removing DIE lesions,
complications that affect the functions of the gastrointestinal, urinary or sexual tract often
arise. Complications after DIE surgery include rectal fistula (0.3–2%), intestinal stenosis
(2%), and bladder atony (4–6%) [123–125].
Several studies have compared laparoscopic or robotically assisted methods in the
surgical treatment of endometriosis [126–128].
Laparoscopically assisted robotics are associated with longer duration of relief than
laparoscopic surgery, but the results are controversial [129,130].
The results of previous studies on the benefits of robot-assisted laparoscopy compared
to conventional laparoscopy are somewhat heterogeneous. However, patients with features
of a complex pelvic situation, such as severe endometriosis, increased body mass index, or
previous surgeries, may benefit from robotic surgery [131].
Endometriosis treatment between robot-assisted laparoscopy and conventional laparoscopy was compared in [130].
This study did not detect any differences in perioperative outcomes of surgery between
robotic surgery and laparoscopy.
The results of other smaller studies, mainly retrospective, were heterogeneous. Some
of these studies have shown longer surgery times for robotic assisted procedures than for
laparoscopy, whereas other studies have shown benefits of robotic surgery [132].
Laparoscopic rectal nodulectomy with nerve-sparing robots has been shown to be a
feasible and safe treatment for isolated sting-rectal DIE [133].
The latest study suggests that robot-assisted laparoscopy is a possible method of DIE
resection [134].
9.3. Physiotherapy in Endometriosis
Physiotherapy in endometriosis focuses on non-invasive and conservative treatment
of pelvic floor disorders in women. It deals with the restoration of the efficiency and
function of tissues and organs in the pelvic area, supports the process of surgical treatment,
relieves pain, thus improving the quality of life [135].
In women suffering from endometriosis, pelvic floor structures are very often dysfunctional. Therefore, it is an indication for urogynecological physiotherapy. Inflammation
accompanying recurrent endometriosis can cause tissue damage, and thus the formation
of scar tissue to heal the affected areas. Unfortunately, a side effect of this process is the
formation of adhesions, which, depending on the location, can cause different symptoms.
Occurring in the abdominal cavity, they can limit the mobility of internal organs and
contribute to the formation of symptoms, i.e., flatulence, constipation, digestive problems,
problems with maintaining proper body posture and pain. For such ailments, it is a good
idea to use manual therapy and osteopathic techniques to improve the mobility of internal
organs and structures of the pelvis and spine. The following types of techniques can be
successfully used: mobilization of the lumbosacral spine, needle therapy, pinopressure,
visceral therapy (general abdominal maneuvers, therapy of female organs, intestines, liver),
if necessary and with the consent of the patient of the technique per vaginum. As a consequence, in combination with the classic treatment of endometriosis and urogynecological
physiotherapy, the course of the disease may become much milder and will allow the
patient to return to everyday life [135].
Physical therapy techniques are known to reduce pain and improve quality of life in
endometriosis. The overall goal of treatment is to teach the patient to relax the muscles,
which in turn helps to break the pain cycle [136].

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, 10554

14 of 29

Evidence suggests that the symptoms of endometriosis are the result of a local peritoneal inflammatory response triggered by an ectopic endometrial implant that undergoes
cyclic bleeding [137].
Regular exercise, on the other hand, has a protective effect against inflammatory diseases because it induces an increase in systemic levels of cytokines with anti-inflammatory
properties [138].
Regular exercise is thought to promote reduced menstrual flow, ovarian stimulation,
and estrogen effects [139].
Analysis of the available literature data shows that there are no controlled and randomized trials determining whether and to what extent exercise can be beneficial for women
with endometriosis. So far, researchers have only speculated on this subject [140].
Physical exercise has been shown to have a beneficial effect on muscle relaxation in
patients suffering from endometriosis, which in turn helps to break their pain cycle [141].
Progressive muscle relaxation training has been shown to be more effective in reducing pain, anxiety, and depression in women with endometriosis undergoing hormone
therapy [142].
Cardiovascular activity helps endometriosis patients maintain good energy levels.
Exercise is one of the most effective strategies for increasing serotonin levels; physical
activity and deep breathing exercises can increase the rate of burning serotonin neurons
in the brain, which can stimulate the production of mood-enhancing substances. Aerobic
exercise, such as walking and swimming, can have a more significant effect on serotonin
levels, strengthening the muscles of the whole body and improving overall circulation [143].
However, there are literature data that draw attention to the possibility of inferring
the non-protective effects of exercise in women with endometriosis, which may result from
the discomfort felt that prevents physical exercise [141,144].
10. Biomarkers
So far, no specific marker for endometriosis has been identified. The search is underway for a biomarker obtained from serum, plasma or urine, which would allow for a quick
and simple diagnosis. In recent years, many substances have been tested that could be
potential markers for endometriosis (Figure 2). With peritoneal endometriosis, serum and
plasma are not good diagnostic material; attention is paid to the eutopic endometrium.
Eutopic endometrial tissue is available by taking the endometrium through a biopsy.

Figure 2. The potential endometriosis biomarkers.

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, 10554

15 of 29

The endometrium comes from the intermediate mesoderm during mesenchymalepithelial transition (MET) during the formation of the genitourinary system. It is a
reversible process, therefore, during the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT, reverse
process MET), it is possible to reach the formation of foci of endometriosis [145]. Foci of
endometriosis behave in the same way as eutopic endometrium. There is monthly bleeding
within them, which trigger an immune response. This causes the foci of endometriosis to
increase [146].
Pain is a typical symptom of endometriosis, so the conduction pathways were analyzed and the brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) was found to be elevated in
women with endometriosis compared to the control group [147]. BDNF is a protein that
affects sensory neurons. As research shows, BDNF is not useful in detecting peritoneal
endometriosis and deeply infiltrating endometriosis [148].
The marker of endometriosis was sought among growth factors and cytokines, because the development of ectopic implants is accompanied by the processes of invasion,
proliferation and angiogenesis. The most promising results were obtained for hepatocyte growth factor (HGF), fibroblasts growth factor (FGF), epithelial growth factor (EGF),
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and interleukin IL-1, IL-6 and IL-8. The most
reproducible results were obtained for IL-6. IL-6 is the most characteristic of endometriosis.
Its sensitivity is 63% and its specificity is 69% [149].
YKL-40, a new biomarker of inflammation, is secreted by activated macrophages and
neutrophils in various inflamed tissues. Serum concentrations of YKL-40 are elevated in
patients with diseases characterized by inflammation. Protein YKL-40 (CHI3L1–chitinase-3like protein 1, HC-gp-39–human cartilage glycoprotein-39, gp-38k, chondrex) is the subject
of scientific research looking for new biomarkers of endometriosis. Literature data suggest
that circulating YKL-40 levels may be a new biomarker for diagnosing and monitoring
endometriosis. The studies established serum concentrations of YKL-40 in patients with
endometriosis compared with healthy people of the same age. It was shown that the level
of YKL-40 was significantly higher in patients with endometriosis compared with healthy
women [150].
It is known that in places affected by endometriosis, oxidative stress further intensifies
the immune response, as a result of which there may be an exacerbation of the development
of endometriosis [151–153]. Women with endometriosis have increased oxidative stress in
the peritoneal cavity. Data indicate that oxidative stress occurs mainly in the peritoneal
cavity in women with advanced stage of the disease [154].
Polak et al. showed that the peritoneal fluid of women with endometriosis is characterized by impaired iron metabolism [154]. This is most likely related to the increased
number of erythrocytes in the peritoneal cavity of women with endometriosis, which leads
to a higher haemoglobin concentration in this environment. Impaired iron homeostasis can
have a significant effect on the pathophysiology of peritoneal endometriosis through the
direct influence of haemoglobin derivatives and/or the creation of a pro-inflammatory and
pro-oxidative environment.
Oxidative stress has been shown to activate the transcription factor NF-κB. The NF-kB
protein family consists of the proteins RelA (p65), RelB, c-Rel, p50 and p52. The active
transcription factor always consists of two subunits and the most common variant of NF-kB
is the RelA (p65) and p50 complexes. NF-kB contains a signalling sequence that allows
the transport of the active complex to the cell nucleus and binding to a specific DNA
consensus. In an inactive form, the NF-kB factor is localized in the cytoplasm of the cell
in association with the inhibitor protein IkB. Activation of the transcription factor NF-kB
occurs through the interaction with the receptors of the cells of pro-inflammatory cytokines
(e.g., TNF-alpha, LPS or IL-1beta), but also such factors as UV rays, antigens or free radicals.
Activation of the specific receptor subsequently leads to phosphorylation of the inhibitory
IkB protein by IKK kinases followed by proteosomal degradation of IkB. The released
complex can be translocated to the cell nucleus [142]. This pathway of activation of the
NF-kB factor is referred to as the canonical pathway. In addition to the canonical NF-kB

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, 10554

16 of 29

activation pathway, the action of LPS, CD40 or lymphotoxin (TNFbeta) may lead to the
so-called non-canonical NF-kB activation pathway. The transcriptional activity of NF-kB is
crucial for cell function and proliferation. The elevated concentrations of TNF-alpha, TNFbeta, LPS, IL-1beta and CD40 in peritoneal fluid in women with endometriosis promote
processes such as adhesion, invasion, proliferation and angiogenesis that stimulate the
development of the disease [155].
Unfortunately, despite the passage of years and many studies in which an endometriosis marker was sought, none of the tested substances can be recommended for the diagnosis
of endometriosis.
The only markers that have found partial clinical use in the diagnosis of endometriosis
are the glycoproteins Ca-125 and Ca-19-9. The sensitivity of Ca-125 is characteristic of
the advanced form of the disease, but its specificity is low because it is often elevated in
other gynecological diseases [156]. The concentrations of Ca-125 and Ca-19-9 glycoproteins
do not give us definitive answers in the differential diagnostic and therapeutic process,
but they help in decision-making and direction of management and therefore remain the
recommended complementary tool.
Despite the fact that research on biomarkers of endometriosis are still ongoing, there
are still no satisfactory results, which makes it impossible to carry out effective laboratory
diagnostics used in the diagnosis and monitoring of the treatment of the disease [157].
Some hope for the discovery of the endometriosis marker is carried by studies of
microRNAs circulating in the blood [158]. MicroRNAs are small ribonucleic acid molecules
about 22 nucleotides long that regulate gene expression by influencing the translation
process. MicroRNAs show stability in tissues and can be easily detected in patients’ serum
using quantitative methods such as qPCR. Determination of a single microRNA can help
distinguish a healthy person from a sick person. However, the greatest prognostic force is
the determination of several microRNAs, the expression of which varies in a given disease.
In studies of microRNAs in endometriosis, it has been shown that a certain group
of genes is regulated with the participation of short, relatively stable fragments of RNA.
MicroRNAs from the let family are among the dominant in endometrial cells.
In the paper of Sahin et al., Let-7b microRNAs have been shown to influence the
expression of the ER-α, ER-ß, Cyp19, KRAS 4A, KRAS 4B, and IL-6 genes [146]. Let-7b has
a pleiotropic effect in the pathophysiology of endometriosis, affecting the regulation of
estrogen levels and the receptor of these growth factors.
Liu et al. suggested that miR449b3p altered expression in endometriosis affects the
development of the disease [159].
Altered expression levels of miR-139-5p and miR-375 were observed in the tissues
of the ectopic endometrium. These microRNAs may regulate the expression of the transcription factors HOXA9 and HOXA10 and the endothelin 1 gene (EDN1) playing a role in
vascular homeostasis, which may be related to the development of endometriosis [160].
Laudański et al. showed that the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) and VEGF
pathway genes can be regulated by abnormal miRNA expression in endometriosis [161].
The protein kinase mTOR regulates the process of cell growth, proliferation and
movement, as well as translation and transcription processes, while VEGF factor intensifies
the process of angiogenesis in endometriosis. A team of Polish researchers conducted
miRNA profiling of the eutopic endometrium from women with endometriosis [162]. A
sample of 667 human miRNAs were studied in patients with endometriosis compared to
the control group. Two of the study miRNAs were elevated, while 13 miRNAs had reduced
levels of expression in eutopic endometrium in endometriosis patients compared to control.
In addition, hsa-miR-483-5p and miR-629 have been shown to be significantly reduced in
expression in endometriosis patients [163].
Gu et al. identified 14 miRNAs that might be involved in the pathogenesis of ovarian
endometriosis: hsa-let-7a-5p, hsa-let-7b-5p, hsa-let-7d-5p, hsa-let-7f-5p, hsa-let-7g-5p, haslet-7i-5p, hsa-miR-199a-3p, hsa-miR-320a, hsa-miR-320b, hsa-miR-320c, hsa-miR-320d, hsamiR-328-3p, hsa-miR-331-3p and hsa-miR-320e.Among them, 10 miRNAs were reported for

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, 10554

17 of 29

the first time to be associated with endometriosis [164]. The miRNA hsa-let-7i-5p and hub
miRNAs including hsa-let-7a-5p, hsa-let-7b-5p, hsa-miR-320a, and hsa-miR-320d might be
potential diagnostic biomarkers [164].
Recent studies showed that the levels of miRNAs 199b-3p, 224-5p, and Let-7d-3p in
plasma are potential diagnostic biomarkers for endometriosis patients [165]. In addition,
miR-146a, miR-149 and miR-499 may have a role in the pathogenesis of endometriosis [166].
Some miRNAs are associated with genetic, epigenetic and angiogenic factors, hormones, cytokines, chemokines, markers of oxidative stress, mediators of inflammation,
hypoxia, angiogenesis, and altered immune systems, contributing to the pathogenesis of
endometriosis. Hormonal imbalance occurs by reducing the levels of miRNA-23a and
miRNA-23b and increasing miRNA-:135a, 135b, 29c and 194-3p [167]. Angiogenesis by
vascular endothelial growth factor is attributed to an increase in miRNA-126, miRNA210, miRNA-21, miRNA-199a-5p and miRNA 20A. OS upregulates miRNA-302a by increased levels of tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α, TNF-β and interleukin-1β. Upregulation of
miRNA-199a and miRNA-16 promotes inflammation and cell proliferation in endometrial
lesions [168]. The gold standard in diagnosing endometriosis is laparoscopy; however,
miRNA can be validated as a diagnostic tool for detection, progression and prevention of
endometriosis in large, independent cohorts of women, with and without endometriosis.
Despite the identification of several miRNAs, the studies are investigatory in nature.
To date, no specific miRNA has been validated for diagnostic purposes (systematic review conducted on PubMed® , Latin American and Caribbean Health Sciences Literature
(LILACS), MEDLINE® and Web of Science databases using the search terms endometriosis
(all fields) AND miRNA (all fields), evaluating all publications up to May 2019) [168].
In conclusion, studies of the diverse microRNA pool in endometriosis have shown that
many biological processes are regulated by the above molecules and can have a significant
impact on the development of lesions. However, the use of microRNA in the diagnosis of
endometriosis is only at the initial stage of research [169,170].
Recently, in the context of endometriosis, long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) that cover
more than 200 bp and are a subtype of non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs) have become the focus
of interest [171].
Unlike a group of short, non-coding RNAs (sncRNAs) such as microRNAs, long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) tend to exhibit greater sequence matching and thus specificity of
action relative to the target genes. Non-coding RNA molecules participate in the processes
of regulation at virtually all stages of the transmission of genetic information: from DNA to
protein. Particularly spectacular is the involvement of certain non-coding RNA molecules
in the mechanisms leading to the switching on or off of the expression of individual genes.
Zhou et al. found that 388 transcripts of lncRNA tested showed overexpression and
188 showed decreased expression levels in the ectopic endometrium compared to eutopic
endometrium [172].
Liu et al. showed that LncRNA H19 may be involved in the pathogenesis of endometriosis especially in the mechanism of recurrence and is a novel potential predictor
of the recurrence of endometriosis. In this study LncRNA H19 expression in the ectopic
and eutopic endometria of endometriosis patients was significantly higher than that in the
normal endometrium [172].
AFAP1-AS1 (AFAP1 Antisense RNA 1) is an RNA Gene, and is affiliated with the
lncRNA class. Recent studies have shown that AFAP1-AS1 may be a potential therapeutic
target for controlling the progression of endometriosis [161]. AFAP1-AS1 silencing can
inhibit cell proliferation and promote apoptosis by regulating the STAT3/TGF-β/Smad
signaling pathway by targeting miR-424-5p in endometrial stromal cells [173].
A study by the Cui et al. team explains that LINC01116 promotes the progression
of endometriosis through the miR-9-5p/FOXP1 axis. This discovery provides a new
therapeutic target for endometriosis patients [174].
HOX antisense intergenic RNA (HOTAIR) is a recently discovered long non-coding
RNA (lncRNA) that plays critical role in gene regulation and chromatin dynamics, which

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, 10554

18 of 29

appears to be mis-regulated in endometriosis. HOTAIR interacts with key epigenetic
regulators such as histone methyltransferase PRC2 and histone demethylase LSD1 and
regulates gene silencing.
Research indicates a significant role for HOTAIR in promoting endometriosis [175].
HOTAIR can be used as a potential target for clinical applications. Higher levels of HOTAIR
mRNA have been shown in endometrial patients with severe endometriosis.
It is suggested that lncRNAs are closely related to the process of endometriosis.
Nevertheless, the molecular mechanisms by which lncRNAs bind to endometriosis need
to be explained in more detail. In summary, lncRNAs show potential as biomarkers
of endometriosis [176]. However, the clinical significance and biological mechanism of
lncRNA in the development of endometriosis remain largely unknown.
11. Endometriosis—Genetics
11.1. Hereditary Genetic Polymorphism
The concept of the genetic basis for the development of endometriosis derives from
many years of observations, in which the family occurrence of this disease was indicated.
Since the 1940s, a much higher incidence among women from families in which women
suffered from endometriosis has been described, as well as a high incidence among siblings,
especially monozygotic twins, where the percentage of co-occurrence exceeds 80% [177].
On the basis of statistical analyses of the family history of endometriosis, it has been proven
that a genetic factor is responsible for about 50% of the predisposition to the disease [178]. It
is believed that genetic and epigenetic conditions are rather conducive to the development
of endometriosis, which is caused by environmental factors, or genetic and epigenetic
changes caused by environmental factors are necessary to move from subtle changes in
endometriosis to the disease stage [179]. The different phenotypic traits observed among
humans are conditioned by millions of polymorphisms scattered throughout the genome,
of which single nucleotide polymorphism (SNPs) account for about 90% of the total
phenotypic variability. Polymorphic variants sometimes occur in a large percentage of the
population and are associated with a variety of phenotypic traits, including susceptibility
to various conditions. It has been postulated that certain SNPs systems, perhaps related to
jointly inherited haplotypes, may promote the development of endometriosis. In a study
on coupling analysis conducted on thousands of families burdened with endometriosis
(GWAS–genome-wide association study) from different populations, a number of potential
regions associated with the inheritance of this disease were indicated.
The epidemiology of endometriosis can be better understood thanks to the work on
the human genome, especially the development of the genome-wide association study
(GWAS) technique, i.e., associative studies of the entire genome.
The first GWAS study on endometriosis was published between 2010 and 2011—two
papers on the Japanese population and one study of European women [180–182].
Studies of the Japanese population showed the relationship of polymorphism rs10965235,
in the CDKN2BAS gene at locus 9p21 and rs16826658, in the area of the WNT4 gene at locus
1p36 [183].
Extensive GWAS research was conducted by the International Endo Gene Consortium
(IEC) in populations of British and Australian women with endometriosis [165]. On the
basis of these studies, loci associated with the development of the disease–7p15.2–was
established. This place is among the genes known so far responsible for the development
of the uterus and placenta [182].
Of lesser importance in the mentioned populations was the loci of chromosome 1p36
previously announced by Japanese studies [180].
In 2012, an international team of scientists conducted the largest genome-wide association study to date, the first among European women comparing DNA from 5586 women
with endometriosis and 9331 people free of the disease [183].
The team identified two regions of the genome associated with an increased risk of
endometriosis. The first is located on chromosome 7. This region may be involved in the

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, 10554

19 of 29

regulation of nearby genes involved in the development of the uterus and its lining. The
second variant is located near the WNT4gene, which is involved in hormone metabolism
and the development and functioning of the woman’s genital tract. The important role
of the WNT4, CDKN2BAS and FN1 genes was confirmed by the research of the team of
Pagliardini et al. [184].
Research indicates a link between the 2p25.1 region, located near the GREB1 gene,
and the risk of endometriosis [185].
Literature data on GWAS studies suggest that certain genetic variants, significantly
more common in endometriosis, appear to be good functional candidates for the genetic
factors responsible for the onset of this disease [185].
GWAS research in endometriosis is still ongoing, providing new results. Literature
reports on 998 Belgian patients with endometriosis and 783 controls showed that the polymorphisms rs7521902, rs13394619 and rs6542095 may be associated with this disease [170].
It is worth noting that three genetic variants in the area of GREB1 (close to rs13394619)
and CDKN2B-AS1 (close to rs1537377) also showed nominally significant associations with
endometriosis [186].
In the paper of Mafra et al., it has been suggested that analysis of genetic variants
in the WNT4 gene area (rs3820282, rs16826658) may help identify patients at high risk of
developing this disease [187].
Albertsen et al. conducted a GWAS study in the European population of 2019 surgically confirmed cases of endometriosis and 14,471 controls [188].
Three of the single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) associated with the disease
have been identified: LINC00339-WNT4 at locus 1p36.12 (rs2235529) and RND3-RBM43
at locus 2q23.3 (rs1519761 and rs6757804). The meta-analysis identified two additional
loci that were associated with endometriosis: RNF144B-ID4 at 6p22.3 (rs6907340) and
HNRNPA3P1-LOC100130539at 10q11.21 (rs10508881).
In the work of the Polish team Sobalska et al., GWAS analysis found statistically
significant links between new SNPs not previously described in the literature and endometriosis [189]. In these studies, a relationship was observed between the rs10129516
polymorphism, located on chromosome 14 in the PARP1P2 and RHOJ intergenic region,
and endometriosis. Gen RHOJ encodes one of many small proteins of the Rho family
that bind GTP (guanosine-50 -triphosphate), which acts as an energy transporter in the
cell. Rho proteins regulate the dynamic assembly of cytoskeleton components in several
physiological processes, such as cell proliferation and motility. Rho are also involved in
cancer transformation and metastasis. The protein encoded by the RHOJ gene is activated
by vascular endothelial growth factor and can regulate angiogenesis and also plays an
important role in adipocyte differentiation, endothelial motility, and cytoskeletal formation [190]. Overexpression of the RHOJ gene has been shown in ectopic endometrium [191].
Endometriosis can be the cause of ectopic pregnancy. The risk of such a pregnancy is
therefore increased in women with endometriosis. It can therefore be assumed that the
RHOJ gene may be involved in the development of endometriosis.
Genetic analyses of the Bylińska et al. confirm the role of polymorphisms of the HLA-G
gene and its receptors LILRB1 and LILRB2 for the development of endometriosis [192].
Human leukocyte antigen G (HLA-G) is recognized by KIR2DL4, LILRB1 and LILRB2
receptors on NK cells, antigen-presenting cells, T cells and others. Expression of HLA-G
molecules in the ectopic endometrium has been demonstrated. The genes for the receptors
KIR2DL4, LILRB1 and LILRB2 are polymorphic, which may affect their activity. The study
of Polish scientists analyzed whether polymorphisms of HLA-G, KIR2DL4, LILRB1 and
LILRB2 genes may affect susceptibility to endometriosis and disease progression. It was
shown that the GG genotype of the rs1632947 polymorphism of the HLA-G gene played
a protecting role against disease and its severe stages; similarly, the CT genotype of the
polymorphism rs1233334 HLA-G played a protective role against disease progression. The
AA genotypes of the rs41308748 polymorphism of the LILRB1 gene and AG rs383369 of

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, 10554

20 of 29

the LILRB2 gene predisposed to endometriosis and its progression. No association of
polymorphism of the KIR2DL4 gene with endometriosis was observed [193].
The work of another team of Polish researchers showed the relationship of polymorphisms rs12700667 and rs4141819 of the RAF gene with infertility in women with advanced
endometriosis [193].
Recent research points to new genes and their polymorphisms related to endometriosis.
Christofolini et al. showed a correlation of the polymorphisms rs10928050 of the KAZN
gene and the rs2427284 of the LAMA5 gene with endometriosis [194].
Genetic studies provide evidence that changes in DNA increase the likelihood of some
women developing endometriosis. Genetic contribution appears to be particularly large in
more serious forms of the disease. Many years of GWAS molecular studies have resulted
in the selection of several candidate genes as potential markers of endometriosis [195].
The study, which is a systematic review of GWAS studies published by PubMed until
December 31, 2019, indicates that variants of the genes WNT4 rs7521902, GREB1 rs13394619,
FN1 rs1250248, IL1A rs6542095 and VEZT rs10859871 may affect the development of endometriosis. However, replication and validation of these variants in different populations
are essential for a better understanding of endometriosis etiopathogenesis, to optimize
diagnosis, and to improve the effectiveness of clinical treatment of the disease [196].
Quite high hopes were associated with the possibility of determining the operation of
polymorphisms of genes responsible for the metabolism of hormones and xenobiotics. Most
of the variants described in the context of changes in drug metabolism were found to have
no effect on the risk of endometriosis. The few polymorphisms associated with this disease
include rs12248560 and rs4244285 that alter the expression of CYP2C19, which is involved in
the breakdown of estrogens and xenobiotics. Other significant changes concern the deletion
variant of the glutathione transferase (GSTM1) gene and the glutathione transferase (GSTP1)
variant rs1695, which as phase II detoxification enzymes participate in the final removal of
drugs and toxins. The presence of glutathione transferase polymorphisms combined with
significant dioxin exposure was associated with the development of endometriosis [197].
A recently published meta-analysis showed that in addition to the above-mentioned
variants, gene variants for interferon γ (IFNG CA repeat) and variants of rs16826658 and
rs2235529 of the WNT4 gene may be relevant. An unknown trend was also confirmed
for the progesterone receptor (PGR) gene variant, the rs1799969 variants of the ICAM1
molecule, rs2292596 of the aromatic hydrocarbon receptor repressor gene (AHRR), the
CYP17A1 rs743572 gene and the rs1801282 gene for the peroxisome γ proliferator-activated
receptor (PPARγ–peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor γ) [198].
Estrogen receptors, acting as transcription factors, play a significant role in endometrial growth and differentiation, as well as in numerous biological functions in eutopic
endometrium and endometriosis. The ERβ receptor encoded by the ESR2 gene is the
dominant isoform in those with endometriosis [198].
A different expression of aromatase in endometriosis foci has been demonstrated
compared to eutopic endometrium. CYP19A1 is a gene encoding aromatase–an enzyme
involved in the biosynthesis of estrogens. The exact basis of the observed changes is not
yet known.
Literature data indicate that studies draw attention to the significant role of estrogen
receptor genes, especially the ESR2 gene and the CYP19A1 gene for the susceptibility
and occurrence of endometriosis [199–201]. The study identified statistically significant
correlations between the new, previously unseen, two SNPs and endometriosis: rs4986938
and rs928554 [200,202]. In the case of rs4986938, the AA genotype was found to reduce
the risk of endometriosis. A similar effect was demonstrated in the presence of the AG
genotype of rs928554. The results obtained during the analysis indicate that the polymorphisms rs4986938 and rs928554 of the ESR2 gene are associated with the occurrence of
endometriosis. Recent studies have shown that the polymorphisms rs17179740 of the ESR2
gene and rs2899470 of the CYP19A1 gene are associated with the occurrence of endometriosis [202]. In the studied group of women with endometriosis, a significant increase in the

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, 10554

21 of 29

expression of the ESR2 gene was found, which may indicate the participation of this factor
in the pathogenesis of endometriosis [200]. The results obtained in the work contribute to
the broadening of knowledge in the subject of molecular mechanisms conducive to the
development of endometriosis. Due to the small amount of research on the analysis of
CYP19A1 and ESR2 gene expression and polymorphisms in patients with endometriosis,
the research makes a significant contribution to expanding the knowledge about the impact
of genetic factors on the development of endometriosis.
Understanding the relationship between gene expression and polymorphism and
endometriosis may contribute to the development of new therapeutic strategies in the
context of this disease. Molecular studies may be a target for personalized therapy in
the future.
11.2. Somatic Mutations
The association of endometriosis with cancer, which appears as a result of genetic
mutations, contributed to the search for pathogenetic mutations occurring in cells during
the development of the disease. The concept of this research is based on the hypothesis that
at least some of the changes arise as a result of somatic mutations absent in the germline
and occur during the development of an individual organism. The occurrence of de novo
mutations in both the endometrial cyst epithelial and peritoneal foci as well as in DIE
foci is described. The most frequently noted genes are: ARID1A, KRAS, PIK3CA and
PPP2R1A [203,204].
Analyzing samples taken from DIE patients with the help of next generation sequencing (NGS), it was possible to describe 51 new mutations involving a large group of
proto-oncogenes. Some of these mutations have previously been described as mutations
that have an initiating effect on the formation of tumors. The new mutations can affect both
the eutopic endometrium and endometriosis foci, and do not have to occur in the germline
cell line. They can also selectively appear only in the foci of endometriosis themselves.
The location of the mutation in the genome appears to be specific to the patient and is not
repeated in others. It is emphasized that the impact of these mutations on the development
of the disease is complex and requires further evaluation. However, it can be assumed that
these patients will be burdened with a higher risk of cancer in the future [203].
12. Summary
Analyzing the research of recent years on endometriosis, it can be seen that the current
therapeutic options available are not optimistic. Unfortunately, the treatment of this disease
is still ineffective. However, the progress of knowledge, especially at the genetic level,
which has taken place in recent years, allows the separation of certain molecular shields for
new therapeutic methods. Much hope is associated with new directions of research, such as
the use of miRNAs or lncRNAs, which regulate key cellular pathways in the development
of the disease, as molecular markers in endometriosis. However, these studies must
involve large groups of patients with their full clinical description in order to be able to
draw conclusions about the use of these particles as markers of endometriosis. There are
reports of the development of the possibility of using ncRNA as diagnostic tools [205].
It remains to be seen whether genetic research will allow for the establishment of new
therapeutic regimens and significantly contribute to improving the treatment results of
women suffering from endometriosis.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, B.S., K.S. and H.R. writing—original draft preparation,
B.S.; writing—review and editing B.S.; revision and proofreading B.S. All authors have read and
agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research has received no external funding.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, 10554

22 of 29

Data Availability Statement: Not applicable.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

References
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.

17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.

28.

29.

30.
31.
32.

Benagiano, G.; Brosens, I.; Lippi, D. The history of endometriosis. Gynecol. Obstet. Investig. 2014, 78, 1–9. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Rokitansky, K. Uber uterusdrusen neubildung. Ztchr Gesselsch Arzte Wein 1860, 16, 577.
Benagiano, G.; Brosens, I. History of adenomyosis. Best Pract. Res. Clin. Obstet. Gynaecol. 2006, 20, 449–463. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Kanikowska, D.; Markowska, J.; Wiktorowicz, K. Historia badań nad endometrioza.˛ Polski Przeglad
˛ Nauk Zdrowiu 2010, 1, 42–45.
Sampson, J.A. Metastatic or embolic endometriosis, due to the menstrual dis- semination of endometrial tissue into the venous
circulation. Am. J. Pathol. 1927, 3, 93. [PubMed]
Sampson, J.A. Peritoneal endometriosis due to the menstrual dissemination of endometrial tissue into the peritoneal cavity. Am.
J. Obstet. Gynecol. 1927, 14, 422–469. [CrossRef]
Nap, A.W.; Groothuis, P.G.; Demir, A.Y.; Evers, J.L.; Dunselman, G.A. Pathogenesis of endometriosis. Best Pract. Res. Clin. Obstet.
Gynaecol. 2004, 18, 233–244. [CrossRef]
Quinn, M. Endometriosis: The consequence of neurological disfunction? Med. Hypoth. 2004, 63, 602–608. [CrossRef]
Schindler, A.E. Pathophysiology, diagnosis and treatment of endometriosis. Miverva Ginecol. 2004, 56, 419–435.
Witz, C. Pathogenesis of endometriosis. Gynecol. Obstet. Investig. 2002, 53, 52–62. [CrossRef]
Burney, R.; Giudice, L. Pathogenesis and pathophysiology of endometriosis. Fertil. Steril. 2012, 98, 511–519. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Giudice, L.C.; Kao, L.C. Endometriosis. Lancet 2004, 364, 1789–1799. [CrossRef]
Nezhat, C.; Falik, R.; McKinney, S.; King, L.P. Pathophysiology and management of urinary tract endometriosis. Nat. Rev. Urol.
2017, 14, 359–372. [CrossRef]
Missmer, S.A.; Hankinson, S.E.; Spiegelman, D.; Barbieri, R.L.; Marshall, L.M.; Hunter, D.J. Incidence of laparoscopically
confirmed endometriosis by demographic, anthropometric, and lifestyle factors. Am. J. Epidemiol. 2004, 160, 784–796. [CrossRef]
Agarwal, S.K.; Chapron, C.; Giudice, L.C.; Laufer, M.R.; Leyland, N.; Missmer, S.A.; Singh, S.S.; Taylor, H.S. Clinical diagnosis of
endometriosis: A call to action. Am. J. Obstet. Gynecol. 2019, 220, 354.e1–354.e12. [CrossRef]
Maggiore, U.L.R.; Ferrero, S.; Mangili, G.; Bergamini, A.; Inversetti, A.; Giorgione, V.; Viganò, P.; Candiani, M. A systematic
review on endometriosis during pregnancy: Diagnosis, misdiagnosis, complications and outcomes. Hum. Reprod. Update 2016, 22,
70–103. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Defrère, S.; Lousse, J.C.; González-Ramos, R.; Colette, S.; Donnez, J.; Van Langendonckt, A. Potential involvement of iron in the
pathogenesis of peritoneal endometriosis. Mol. Hum. Reprod. 2008, 14, 377–385. [CrossRef]
Eskenazi, B.; Warner, M. Epidemiology of endometriosis. Obstet. Gynecol. Clin. N. Am. 1997, 24, 235–258. [CrossRef]
Lu, P.; Ory, S. Endometriosis: Current management. Mayo Clin. Proc. 1995, 70, 453–463. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Dmowski, W. Endometriosis at the end of the millenium; the controversy remains. Pol. J. Gyn. Investig. 1999, 1, 175–186.
Kao, L.C.; Tulac, S.; Lobo, S.; Imani, B.; Yang, J.P.; Germeyer, A.; Osteen, K.; Taylor, R.N.; Lessey, B.A.; Giudice, L.C. Global gene
profiling in human endometrium during the window of implantation. Endocrinology 2002, 143, 2119–2138. [CrossRef]
Cramer, D.W.; Missmer, S.A. The epidemiology of endometriosis. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 2002, 955, 11–22. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Gadomska, H.; Kamiński, P.; Marianowski, L. Endometrioza. Medipress Ginekol. 1997, 3, 2–5.
Signorile, P.G.; Baldi, F.; Bussani, R.; D’Armiento, M.; De Falco, M.; Boccellino, M.; Quagliuolo, L.; Baldi, A. New evidence of the
presence of endometriosis in the human fetus. Reprod. Biomed. Online 2010, 21, 142–147. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Martin, J.D.; Hauck, A.E. Endometriosis in the male. Am. Surg. 1985, 51, 426–430.
Goldstein, D.P.; de Cholnoky, C.; Emans, S.J.; Leventhal, J.M. Laparoscopy on the diagnosis and management of pelvic pain in
adolescents. J. Reprod. Med. 1980, 24, 251–256. [PubMed]
Simoens, S.; Dunselman, G.; Dirksen, C.; Hummelshoj, L.; Bokor, A.; Brandes, I.; Brodszky, V.; Canis, M.; Colombo, G.L.; DeLeire,
T.; et al. The burden of endometriosis: Costs and quality of life of women with endometriosis and treated in referral centres. Hum.
Reprod. 2012, 27, 1292–1299. [CrossRef]
Nnoaham, K.E.; Hummelshoj, L.; Webster, P.; d’Hooghe, T.; de Cicco Nardone, F.; de Cicco Nardone, C.; Jenkinson, C.; Kennedy,
S.H.; Zondervan, K.T. World Endometriosis Research Foundation Global Study of Women’s Health consortium. Impact of
endometriosis on quality of life and work productivity: A multi-center study across ten countries. Fertil. Steril. 2011, 96, 366–373.
[CrossRef]
De Graaff, A.A.; D’Hooghe, T.M.; Dunselman, G.A.; Dirksen, C.D.; Hummelshoj, L.; WERF EndoCost Consortium; Simoens, S.
The significant effect of endometriosis on physical, mental and social well-being: Results from an inter-national cross-sectional
survey. Hum. Reprod. 2013, 28, 2677–2685. [CrossRef]
Vessey, M.P.; Villerd-Mackintosh, L.; Painter, R. Epidemiology of endometriosis in women attending family planning clinics. BMJ
1993, 306, 182–184. [CrossRef]
Vigano, P.; Parazzini, F.; Somigliana, E.; Vercellini, P. Endometriosis: Epidemiology and eathiological factors. Best Pract. Res. Clin.
Obstet. Gynaecol. 2004, 18, 177–200. [CrossRef]
Bourdel, N.; Matsusakï, S.; Roman, H.; Lenglet, Y.; Botchorischvili, R.; Mage, G.; Canis, M. Endometriosis in teenagers. Gynecol.
Obstet. Fertil. 2006, 34, 727–734. [CrossRef]

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, 10554

33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.
42.

43.

44.
45.
46.
47.
48.
49.
50.
51.
52.
53.
54.
55.
56.
57.

58.
59.
60.
61.
62.
63.
64.

23 of 29

Kowalczyk-Amico, K.; Szubert, M.; Suzin, J. Angiogenesis and inflammatory response in endometriosis. Przeglad Menopauzalny
2009, 5, 261–264.
Jakiel, G.; Robak-Chołubek, D.; Tkaczuk-Włach, J. Endometriosis. Przeglad Menopauzalny 2006, 2, 126–129.
Loring, M.; Chen, T.Y.; Isaacson, K.B. A Systematic Review of Adenomyosis: It Is Time to Reassess What We Thought We Knew
about the Disease. J. Minim. Invasive Gynecol. 2021, 28, 644–655. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Ferenczy, A. Pathophysiology of adenomyosis. Hum. Reprod. Update 1998, 4, 312–322. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Kold, M.; Hansen, T.; Vedsted-Hansen, H.; Forman, A. Mindfulness-based psychological intervention for coping with pain in
endometriosis. Nord. Psychol. 2016, 68, 144–146. [CrossRef]
Ahn, S.H.; Singh, V.; Tayade, C. Biomarkers in endometriosis: Challenges and opportunities. Fertil. Steril. 2017, 107, 523–532.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
Nisenblat, V.; Bossuyt, P.M.; Shaikh, R.; Farquhar, C.; Jordan, V.; Scheffers, C.S.; Mol, B.W.; Johnson, N.; Hull, M.L. Blood
biomarkers for the non-invasive diagnosis of endometriosis. Cochrane Database Syst. Rev. 2016, 1, CD012179. [CrossRef]
Gupta, D.; Hull, M.L.; Fraser, I.; Miller, L.; Bossuyt, P.M.; Johnson, N.; Nisenblat, N.J.V. Endometrial biomarkers for the
non-invasive diagnosis of endometriosis. Cochrane Database Syst. Rev. 2016, 4, CD012165. [CrossRef]
Fraga, M.V.; Oliveira Brito, L.G.; Yela, D.A.; de Mira, T.A.; Benetti-Pinto, C.L. Pelvic floor muscle dysfunctions in women with
deep infiltrative endometriosis: An underestimated association. Int. J. Clin. Pract. 2021, 75, e14350. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Mabrouk, M.; Raimondo, D.; Arena, A.; Iodice, R.; Altieri, M.; Sutherland, N.; Salucci, P.; Moro, E.; Seracchioli, R. Parametrial
Endometriosis: The Occult Condition that Makes the Hard Harder. J. Minim. Invasive Gynecol. 2019, 26, 871–876. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
Cramer, D.W.; Wilson, E.; Stillman, R.J.; Berger, M.J.; Belisle, S.; Schiff, I.; Albrecht, B.; Gibson, M.; Stadel, B.V.; Schoenbaum,
S.C. The relation of endometriosis to menstrual characteristic, smoking, and exercise. JAMA 1986, 255, 1904–1908. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
Parazzini, F.; La Vecchia, C.; Franceschi, S.; Negri, E.; Cecchetti, G. Risk faktors for endometroid, mucinous, and serous benign
ovarian cysts. Int. J. Epidemiol. 1989, 18, 108–112. [CrossRef]
Matorras, R.; Rodíquez, F.; Pijoan, J.I.; Ramón, O.; Gutierrez de Terán, G.; Rodríguez-Escudero, F. Epidemiology of endometriosis
in infertile woman. Fertil. Steril. 1995, 63, 34–38. [CrossRef]
Parazzini, F.; Ferraroni, M.; Fedele, L.; Bocciolone, L.; Rubessa, S.; Riccardi, A. Pelvic endometriosis: Reproductive and menstrual
risk factors at different stages in Lombardy, northern Italy. J. Epidemiol. Community Health 1995, 49, 61–64. [CrossRef]
Falcone, T.; Flyckt, R. Clinical Management of Endometriosis. Obstet. Gynecol. 2018, 131, 557–571. [CrossRef]
Moen, M.H.; Schei, B. Epidemiology of endometriosis in a Norwegian county. Acta Obstet. Gynecol. Scand. 1997, 76, 559–562.
[CrossRef]
Molgaard, C.A.; Golbeck, A.L.; Gresham, L. Current concepts in endometriosis. West J. Med. 1985, 143, 42–46.
Tang, Y.; Zhao, M.; Lin, L.; Gao, Y.; Chen, G.Q.; Chen, S.; Chen, Q. Is body mass index associated with the incidence of
endometriosis and the severity of dysmenorrhoea: A case-control study in China? BMJ Open 2020, 10, e037095. [CrossRef]
Parazzini, F.; Chiaffarino, F.; Surace, M.; Chatenoud, L.; Cipriani, S.; Chiantera, V.; Benzi, G.; Fedele, L. Selected food intake and
risk of endometriosis. Hum. Reprod. 2004, 19, 1755–1759. [CrossRef]
Yamamoto, A.; Harris, H.R.; Vitonis, A.F.; Chavarro, J.E.; Missmer, S.A. A prospective cohort study of meat and fish consumption
and endometriosis risk. Am. J. Obstet. Gynecol. 2018, 219, 178.e1–178.e10. [CrossRef]
Vinatier, D.; Orazi, G.; Cosson, M.; Dufour, P. Theories of endometriosis. Eur. J. Obstet. Gynecol. Reprod. Biol. 2001, 96, 21–34.
[CrossRef]
Witz, C.A.; Schenken, R.S. Semin Reprod Endocrinol. Pathogenesis 1997, 15, 199–208.
Rana, N.; Braun, D.P.; House, R.; Gebel, H.; Rotman, C.; Dmowski, W.P. Basal and stimulated secretion of cytokines by peritoneal
macrophages in women with endometriosis. Fertil. Steril. 1996, 65, 925–930. [CrossRef]
Lebovic, D.I.; Mueller, M.D.; Taylor, R.N. Immunobiology of endometriosis. Fertil. Steril. 2001, 75, 1–10. [CrossRef]
Sinaii, N.; Cleary, S.D.; Ballweg, M.L.; Nieman, L.K.; Stratton, P. High rates of autoimmune and endocrine disorders, fibromyalgia,
chronic fatigue syndrome and atopic diseases among women with endometriosis: A survey analysis. Hum. Reprod. 2002, 17,
2715–2724. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Fujii, S. Secondary Müllerian system and endometriosis. Am. J. Obstet. Gynecol. 1991, 165, 219–225. [CrossRef]
Laganà, A.S.; Garzon, S.; Götte, M.; Viganò, P.; Franchi, M.; Ghezzi, F.; Martin, D.C. The Pathogenesis of Endometriosis: Molecular
and Cell Biology Insights. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019, 20, 5615. [CrossRef]
Koninckx, P.R.; Kennedy, S.H.; Barlow, D.H. Endometriotic disease: The role of peritoneal fluid. Hum. Reprod. Update 1998, 4,
741–751. [CrossRef]
Reese, K.A.; Reddy, S.; Rock, J.A. Endometriosis in an adolescent population: The emory experience. J. Pediatr. Adolesc. Gynecol.
1996, 9, 125–128. [CrossRef]
Matarese, G.; DePlacido, G.; Nikas, Y.; Alviggi, C. Pathogenesis of endometriosis: Natura limmunity dysfunction or autoimmune
disease? Trends Mol. Med. 2003, 9, 223–228. [CrossRef]
Dmowski, W.; Steele, R.; Baker, G. Deficient cellular immunity in endometriosis. Am. J. Obstet. Gynecol. 1981, 14, 377–388.
[CrossRef]
Burney, R.O. Biomarker development in endometriosis. Scand. J. Clin. Lab. Investig. Suppl. 2014, 244, 75–81. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, 10554

65.
66.
67.
68.
69.
70.
71.
72.
73.

74.
75.
76.
77.

78.
79.
80.
81.
82.
83.
84.
85.

86.
87.
88.

89.
90.
91.
92.
93.

24 of 29

Asghari, S.; Valizadeh, A.; Aghebati-Maleki, L.; Nouri, M.; Yousefi, M. Endometriosis: Perspective, lights, and shadows of
etiology. Biomed. Pharm. 2018, 106, 163–174. [CrossRef]
Lee, Y.H.; Cui, L.; Fang, J.; Chern, B.S.; Tan, H.H.; Chan, J.K. Limited value of pro-inflammatory oxylipins and cytokines as
circulating biomarkers in endometriosis—A targeted ‘omics study. Sci. Rep. 2016, 6, 1–7. [CrossRef]
Ulukus, M.; Ulukus, E.C.; Tavmergen Goker, E.N.; Tavmergen, E.; Zheng, W.; Arici, A. Expression of interleukin-8 and monocyte
chemotactic protein 1 in women with endometriosis. Fertil. Steril. 2009, 91, 687–693. [CrossRef]
King, A.E.; Critchley, H.O.; Kelly, R.W. The NF-κB pathway in human endometrium and first trimester decidua. Mol. Hum.
Reprod. 2001, 7, 175–183. [CrossRef]
Yoshida, S.; Amano, H.; Hayashi, I.; Kitasato, H.; Kamata, M.; Inukai, M.; Yoshimura, H.; Majima, M. COX-2/VEGF-dependent
facilitation of tumor-associated angiogenesis and tumor growth in vivo. Lab. Investig. 2003, 83, 1385–1394. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Sikora, J.; Mielczarek-Palacz, A.; Kondera-Anasz, Z. Role of natural killer cell activity in the pathogenesis of endometriosis. Curr.
Med. Chem. 2011, 18, 200–208. [CrossRef]
Suen, J.L.; Chang, Y.; Chiu, P.R.; Hsieh, T.H.; Hsi, E.; Chen, Y.C.; Chen, Y.F.; Tsai, E.M. Serum level of IL-10 is increased in patients
with endometriosis, and IL-10 promotes the growth of lesions in a murine model. Am. J. Pathol. 2014, 184, 464–471. [CrossRef]
Dunn, C.L.; Critchley, H.O.; Kelly, R.W. IL-15 regulation in human endometrial stromal cells. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 2002, 87,
1898–1901. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Koga, K.; Osuga, Y.; Yoshino, O.; Hirota, Y.; Yano, T.; Tsutsumi, O.; Taketani, Y. Elevated interleukin-16 levels in the peritoneal
fluid of women with endometriosis may be a mechanism for inflammatory reactions associated with endometriosis. Fertil. Steril.
2005, 83, 878–882. [CrossRef]
Azimzadeh, P.; Khorram Khorshid, H.R.; Akhondi, M.M.; Shirazi, A. Association of interleukin-16 polymorphisms with disease
progression and susceptibility in endometriosis. Int. J. Immunogenet. 2016, 43, 297–302. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Borrelli, G.M.; Carvalho, K.; Kallas, E.G.; Mechsner, S.; Baracat, E.C.; Abrão, M.S. Chemokines in the pathogenesis of endometriosis
and infertility. J. Reprod. Immunol. 2013, 98, 1–9. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Meka, R.R.; Venkatesha, S.H.; Dudics, S.; Acharya, B.; Moudgil, K.D. IL-27-induced modulation of autoimmunity and its
therapeutic potential. Autoimmun. Rev. 2015, 14, 1131–1141. [CrossRef]
Santulli, P.; Borghese, B.; Chouzenoux, S.; Vaiman, D.; Borderie, D.; Streuli, I.; Goffinet, F.; de Ziegler, D.; Weill, B.; Batteux, F.; et al.
Serum and peritoneal interleukin-33 levels are elevated in deeply infiltrating endometriosis. Hum. Reprod. 2012, 27, 2001–2009.
[CrossRef]
Kaabachi, W.; Kacem, O.; Belhaj, R.; Hamzaoui, A.; Hamzaoui, K. Interleukin-37 in endometriosis. Immunol. Lett. 2017, 185, 52–55.
[CrossRef]
Witz, C.A.; Allsup, K.T.; Montoya-Rodriguez, I.A.; Vaughan, S.L.; Centonze, V.E.; Schenken, R.S. Pathogenesis of endometriosis–
current research. Hum. Fertil. 2003, 6, 34–40. [CrossRef]
Hill, J. Immunology and endometriosis. Fertil. Steril. 1992, 58, 262–264. [CrossRef]
Laschke, M.W.; Giebels, C.; Menger, M.D. Vasculogenesis: A new piece of the endometriosis puzzle. Hum. Reprod. Update 2011,
17, 628–636. [CrossRef]
McLaren, J.; Prentice, A.; Charnock-Jones, D.S.; Smith, S.K. Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) concentrations are elevated
in peritoneal fluid of women with endometriosis. Hum. Reprod. 1996, 11, 220–223. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Halis, G.; Arici, A. Endometriosis and inflammation in infertility. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 2004, 1034, 300–315. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Florova, M.S.; Yarmolinskaya, M.I.; Potin, V.V. Prospects of metformin in the treatment of endometriosis. J. Obstet. Woman Dis.
2017, 66, 67–76. [CrossRef]
Hudelist, G.; Ballard, K.; English, J.; Wright, J.; Banerjee, S.; Mastoroudes, H.; Thomas, A.; Singer, C.F.; Keckstein, J. Transvaginal
sonography vs clinical examination in the preoperative diagnosis of deep infiltrating endometriosis. Ultrasound Obstet. Gynecol.
2011, 37, 480–487. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Crispi, C.P.; de Souza, C.A.; Oliveira, M.A.; Dibi, R.P.; Cardeman, L.; Sato, H.; Schor, E. Endometriosis of the round ligament of
uterus. J. Minim. Invasive Gynecol. 2012, 19, 46–51. [CrossRef]
Dunselman, G.A.; Vermeulen, N.; Becker, C.; Calhaz-Jorge, C.; D’Hooghe, T.; De Bie, B.; Heikinheimo, O.; Horne, A.W.; Kiesel, L.;
Nap, A.; et al. ESHRE guideline: Management of women with endometriosis. Hum. Reprod. 2014, 29, 400–412. [CrossRef]
Sampson, J.A. Perforating hemorrhagic (chocolate) cysts of the ovary: Their importance and especially their relation to pelvic
adenomas of endometrial type (“adenomyoma” of the uterus, rectovaginal septum, sigmoid, etc.). Arch. Surg. 1921, 3, 245–323.
[CrossRef]
Krasa, A.; Kozioł, M.; Piecewicz-Szcz˛esna, H.; Pawlicki, M.; Łopuszyńska, A.; Krawiec, P.; Piekarska, E. Endometriosis and an
increased risk of malignancies. A literature review. J. Educ. Health Sport 2020, 10, 290–298. [CrossRef]
Kistner, R.W.; Siegler, A.M.; Behrman, S.J. Suggested classification for endometriosis: Relationship to infertility. Fertil. Steril. 1977,
28, 1008–1010. [CrossRef]
Brosens, I.A. Classification of endometriosis revisited. Lancet 1993, 341, 630. [CrossRef]
Damario, M.A.; Rock, J.A. Classification of endometriosis. Semin. Reprod. Endocrinol. 1997, 15, 235–244. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Gilmour, J.A.; Huntington, A.; Wilson, H.V. The impact of endometriosis on work and social participation. Int. J. Nurs. Pract.
2008, 14, 443–448. [CrossRef]

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, 10554

94.

25 of 29

Szamatowicz, M. Endometriosis—Still an enigmatic disease. What are the causes, how to diagnose it and how to treat successfully?
Gynecol. Endocrinol. 2008, 24, 535–536. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
95. Tuttlies, F.; Keckstein, J.; Ulrich, U.; Possover, M.; Schweppe, K.W.; Wustlich, M.; Buchweitz, O.; Greb, R.; Kandolf, O.; Mangold,
R.; et al. ENZIAN-score, a classification of deep infiltrating endometriosis. Zent. Gynakol. 2005, 127, 275–281. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
96. Plodeck, V.; Sommer, U.; Baretton, G.B.; Aust, D.E.; Laniado, M.; Hoffmann, R.T.; Platzek, I. A rare case of pancreatic endometriosis
in a postmenopausal woman and review of the literature. Acta Radiol. Open 2016, 5, 2058460116669385. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
97. Andrade, M.T.; de Freitas, C.V.; Câmara, S.F.; Vieira, J.J. Umbilical nodule with cyclical bleeding: A case report and literature
review of atypical endometriosis. Case Rep. Obstet. Gynecol. 2016, 2016, 7401409. [CrossRef]
98. Fassbender, A.; Vodolazkaia, A.; Saunders, P.; Lebovic, D.; Waelkens, E.; De Moor, B.; D’Hooghe, T. Biomarkers of endometriosis.
Fertil. Steril. 2013, 99, 1135–1145. [CrossRef]
99. Leyland, N.; Casper, R.; Laberge, P.; Singh, S.S.; SOGC. Endometriosis: Diagnosis and management. J. Obstet. Gynaecol. Can. 2010,
32, S1–S32. [CrossRef]
100. Cornillie, F.J.; Oosterlynck, D.; Lauweryns, J.M.; Koninckx, P.R. Deeply infiltrating pelvic endometriosis: Histology and clinical
significance. Fertil. Steril. 1990, 53, 978–983. [CrossRef]
101. Chapron, C.; Chopin, N.; Borghese, B.; Foulot, H.; Dousset, B.; Vacher-Lavenu, M.C.; Vieira, M.; Hasan, W.; Bricou, A. Deeply
infiltrating endometriosis: Pathogenetic implications of the anatomical distribution. Hum. Reprod. 2006, 21, 1839–1845. [CrossRef]
102. Seracchioli, R.; Poggioli, G.; Pierangeli, F.; Manuzzi, L.; Gualerzi, B.; Savelli, L.; Remorgida, V.; Mabrouk, M.; Venturoli, S. Surgical
outcome and long-term follow up after laparoscopic rectosigmoid resection in women with deep infiltrating endometriosis. BJOG
2007, 114, 889–895. [CrossRef]
103. Raimondo, D.; Youssef, A.; Mabrouk, M.; Del Forno, S.; Martelli, V.; Pilu, G.; Rizzo, N.; Zannoni, L.; Paradisi, R.; Seracchioli, R.
Pelvic floor muscle dysfunction on 3D/4D transperineal ultrasound in patients with deep infiltrating endometriosis: A pilot
study. Ultrasound Obstet. Gynecol. 2017, 50, 527–532. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
104. Dietz, H.P. Pelvic floor ultrasound: A review. Am. J. Obstet. Gynecol. 2010, 202, 321–334. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
105. Youssef, A.; Montaguti, E.; Sanlorenzo, O.; Cariello, L.; Salsi, G.; Morganelli, G.; Azzarone, C.; Pilu, G.; Rizzo, N. Reliability of
new three-dimensional ultrasound technique for pelvic hiatal area measurement. Ultrasound Obstet. Gynecol. 2016, 47, 629–635.
[CrossRef]
106. Mabrouk, M.; Raimondo, D.; Parisotto, M.; Del Forno, S.; Arena, A.; Seracchioli, R. Pelvic floor dysfunction at transperineal
ultrasound and voiding alteration in women with posterior deep endometriosis. Int. Urogynecol. J. 2019, 30, 1527–1532. [CrossRef]
107. Mabrouk, M.; Raimondo, D.; Del Forno, S.; Baruffini, F.; Arena, A.; Benfenati, A.; Youssef, A.; Martelli, V.; Seracchioli, R. Pelvic
floor muscle assessment on three- and four-dimensional transperineal ultrasound in women with ovarian endometriosis with or
without retroperitoneal infiltration: A step towards complete functional assessment. Ultrasound Obstet. Gynecol. 2018, 52, 265–268.
[CrossRef]
108. Youssef, A.; Montaguti, E.; Sanlorenzo, O.; Cariello, L.; Awad, E.E.; Pacella, G.; Ghi, T.; Pilu, G.; Rizzo, N. A new simple technique
for 3-dimensional sonographic assessment of the pelvic floor muscles. J. Ultrasound Med. 2015, 34, 65–72. [CrossRef]
109. Faubion, S.S.; Shuster, L.T.; Bharucha, A.E. Recognition and management of nonrelaxing pelvic floor dysfunction. Mayo Clin. Proc.
2012, 87, 187–193. [CrossRef]
110. Gehrich, A.P.; Aseff, J.N.; Iglesia, C.B.; Fischer, J.R.; Buller, J.L. Chronic urinary retention and pelvic floor hypertonicity after
surgery for endometriosis: A case series. Am. J. Obstet. Gynecol. 2005, 193, 2133–2137. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
111. Tu, F.F.; Holt, J.; Gonzales, J.; Fitzgerald, C.M. Physical therapy evaluation of patients with chronic pelvic pain: A controlled
study. Am. J. Obstet. Gynecol. 2008, 198, 272.e1–272.e7. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
112. Beck, J.J.; Elzevier, H.W.; Pelger, R.C.; Putter, H.; Voorham-van der Zalm, P.J. Multiple pelvic floor complaints are correlated with
sexual abuse history. J. Sex. Med. 2009, 6, 193–198. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
113. Chapron, C.; Santulli, P.; de Ziegler, D.; Noel, J.C.; Anaf, V.; Streuli, I.; Foulot, H.; Souza, C.; Borghese, B. Ovarian endometrioma:
Severe pelvic pain is associated with deeply infiltrating endometriosis. Hum. Reprod. 2012, 27, 702–711. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
114. Horne, A.W.; Daniels, J.; Hummelshoj, L.; Cox, E.; Cooper, K.G. Surgical removal of superficial peritoneal endometriosis for
managing women with chronic pelvic pain: Time for a rethink? BJOG 2019, 126, 1414–1416. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
115. Basta, A.; Brucka, A.; Górski, J.; Kotarski, J.; Kulig, B.; Oszukowski, P.; Por˛eba, R.; Radowicki, S.; Radwan, J.; Sikora, J.; et al.
Stanowisko Zespołu Ekspertów Polskiego Towarzystwa Ginekologicznego dotyczace
˛ diagnostyki i metod leczenia endometriozy.
Ginekol. Pol. 2012, 83, 871–876. [PubMed]
116. Donnez, J.; Dolmans, M.M. Endometriosis and Medical Therapy: From Progestogens to Progesterone Resistance to GnRH
Antagonists: A Review. J. Clin. Med. 2021, 10, 1085. [CrossRef]
117. Taylor, H.S.; Giudice, L.C.; Lessey, B.A.; Abrao, M.S.; Kotarski, J.; Archer, D.F.; Diamond, M.P.; Surrey, E.; Johnson, N.P.; Watts,
N.B.; et al. Treatment of Endometriosis-Associated Pain with Elagolix, an Oral GnRH Antagonist. N. Engl. J. Med. 2017, 377,
28–40. [CrossRef]
118. Shebley, M.; Polepally, A.R.; Nader, A.; Ng, J.W.; Winzenborg, I.; Klein, C.E.; Noertersheuser, P.; Gibbs, M.A.; Mostafa, N.M.
Clinical Pharmacology of Elagolix: An Oral Gonadotropin-Releasing Hormone Receptor Antagonist for Endometriosis. Clin.
Pharm. 2020, 59, 297–309. [CrossRef]
119. Bradley, C.A. Reproductive endocrinology: Elagolix in endometriosis. Nat. Rev. Endocrinol. 2017, 13, 439. [CrossRef]

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, 10554

26 of 29

120. Kilpatrick, R.D.; Chiuve, S.E.; Leslie, W.D.; Wegrzyn, L.R.; Gao, W.; Yang, H.; Soliman, A.M.; Snabes, M.C.; Koenigsberg, S.;
Zhong, J.; et al. Estimating the Effect of Elagolix Treatment for Endometriosis on Postmenopausal Bone Outcomes: A Model
Bridging Phase III Trials to an Older Real-World Population. JBMR Plus 2020, 4, e10401. [CrossRef]
121. Abbas Suleiman, A.; Nader, A.; Winzenborg, I.; Beck, D.; Polepally, A.R.; Ng, J.; Noertersheuser, P.; Mostafa, N.M. Exposure-Safety
Analyses Identify Predictors of Change in Bone Mineral Density and Support Elagolix Labeling for Endometriosis-Associated
Pain. CPT Pharmacometrics. Syst. Pharm. 2020, 9, 639–648.
122. Schipper, E.; Nezhat, C. Video-assisted laparoscopy for the detection and diagnosis of endometriosis: Safety, reliability, and
invasiveness. Int. J. Womens Health 2012, 4, 383–393.
123. Roman, H.; Vassilieff, M.; Tuech, J.; Huet, E.; Savoye, G.; Marpeau, L.; Puscasiu, L. Postoperative digestive function after
radical versus conservative surgical philosophy for deep endometriosis infiltrating the rectum. Fertil. Steril. 2013, 99, 1695–1704.
[CrossRef]
124. Spagnolo, E.; Zannoni, L.; Raimondo, D.; Ferrini, G.; Mabrouk, M.; Benfenati, A.; Villa, G.; Bertoldo, V.; Seracchioli, R. Urodynamic
Evaluation and Anorectal Manometry Pre- and Post-operative Bowel Shaving Surgical Procedure for Posterior Deep Infiltrating
Endometriosis: A Pilot Study. J. Minim. Invasive Gynecol. 2014, 21, 1080–1085. [CrossRef]
125. Mabrouk, M.; Raimondo, D.; Altieri, M.; Arena, A.; Del Forno, S.; Moro, E.; Mattioli, G.; Iodice, R.; Seracchioli, R. Surgical,
Clinical, and Functional Outcomes in Patients with Rectosigmoid Endometriosis in the Gray Zone: 13-Year Long-Term Follow-up.
J. Minim. Invasive Gynecol. 2019, 26, 1110–1116. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
126. Soto, E.; Luu, T.H.; Liu, X.; Magrina, J.F.; Wasson, M.N.; Einarsson, J.I.; Cohen, S.L.; Falcone, T. Laparoscopy vs. Robotic Surgery
for Endometriosis (LAROSE): A multicenter, randomized, controlled trial. Fertil. Steril. 2017, 107, 996–1002. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
127. Nezhat, F.R.; Sirota, I. Perioperative Outcomes of Robotic Assisted Laparoscopic Surgery Versus Conventional Laparoscopy
Surgery for Advanced-Stage Endometriosis. JSLS 2014, 18, e2014.00094. [CrossRef]
128. Restaino, S.; Mereu, L.; Finelli, A.A.; Spina, M.R.; Marini, G.; Catena, U.; Turco, L.C.; Moroni, R.; Milani, M.; Cela, V.; et al. Robotic
surgery vs laparoscopic surgery in patients with diagnosis of endometriosis: A systematic review and meta-analysis. J. Robot.
Surg. 2020, 14, 687–694. [CrossRef]
129. Magrina, J.F.; Espada, M.; Kho, R.M.; Cetta, R.; Chang, Y.H.; Magtibay, P.M. Surgical Excision of Advanced Endometriosis:
Perioperative Outcomes and Impacting Factors. J. Minim. Invasive Gynecol. 2015, 22, 944–950. [CrossRef]
130. Nezhat, C.R.; Stevens, A.; Balassiano, E.; Soliemannjad, R. Robotic-assisted laparoscopy vs conventional laparoscopy for the
treatment of advanced stage endometriosis. J. Minim. Invasive Gynecol. 2015, 22, 40–44. [CrossRef]
131. Hur, C.; Falcone, T. Robotic treatment of bowel endometriosis. Best Pract. Res. Clin. Obstet. Gynaecol. 2021, 71, 129–143. [CrossRef]
132. Chen, S.H.; Li, Z.A.; Du, X.P. Robot-assisted versus conventional laparoscopic surgery in the treatment of advanced stage
endometriosis: A meta-analysis. Clin. Exp. Obstet. Gynecol. 2016, 43, 422–426.
133. Ercoli, A.; Bassi, E.; Ferrari, S.; Surico, D.; Fagotti, A.; Fanfani, F.; De Cicco, F.; Surico, N.; Scambia, G. Robotic-assisted
conservative excision of retrocervical-rectal deep infiltrating endometriosis: A case series. J. Minim. Invasive Gynecol. 2017, 24,
863–868. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
134. Hiltunen, J.; Eloranta, M.L.; Lindgren, A.; Keski-Nisula, L.; Anttila, M.; Sallinen, H. Robotic-assisted laparoscopy is a feasible method for resection of deep infiltrating endometriosis, especially in the rectosigmoid area. J. Int. Med. Res. 2021, 49,
3000605211032788. [CrossRef]
135. Vural, M. Pelvic pain rehabilitation. Turk. J. Phys. Med. Rehabil. 2018, 64, 291–299. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
136. Troyer, M.R. Differential diagnosis of endometriosis in a young adult woman with nonspecific low back pain. Phys. Ther. 2007, 87,
801–810. [CrossRef]
137. Arya, P.; Shaw, R. Endometriosis: Current thinking. Curr. Obstet. Gynaecol. 2005, 15, 191–198. [CrossRef]
138. Febbraio, M.A. Exercise and inflammation. J. Appl. Physiol. 2007, 103, 376–377. [CrossRef]
139. Warren, M.P.; Perlroth, N.E. The effects of intense exercise on the female reproductive system. J. Endocrinol. 2001, 170, 3–11.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
140. Koppan, A.; Hamori, J.; Vranics, I.; Garai, J.; Kriszbacher, I.; Bodis, J.; Rebek-Nagy, G.; Koppan, M. Pelvic pain in endometriosis:
Painkillers or sport to alleviate symptoms? Acta Physiol. Hung. 2010, 97, 234–239. [CrossRef]
141. Awad, E.; Ahmed, H.; Yousef, A.; Abbas, R. Efficacy of exercise on pelvic pain and posture associated with endometriosis: Within
subject design. J. Phys. Sci. 2017, 29, 2112–2115. [CrossRef]
142. Zhao, L.; Wu, H.; Zhou, X.; Wang, Q.; Zhu, W.; Chen, J. Effects of progressive muscular relaxation training on anxiety, depression
and quality of life of endometriosis patients under gonadotrophin-releasing hormone agonist therapy. Eur. J. Obstet. Gynecol.
Reprod. Biol. 2012, 162, 211–215. [CrossRef]
143. Carpenter, S.E.; Tjaden, B.; Rock, J.A.; Kimball, A. The effect of regular exercise on women receiving danazol for treatment of
endometriosis. Int. J. Gynaecol. Obstet. 1995, 49, 299–304. [CrossRef]
144. Lund, I.; Lundeberg, T. Is acupuncture effective in the treatment of pain in endometriosis? J. Pain Res. 2016, 9, 157–165. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
145. Matsuzaki, S.; Darcha, C. Epithelial to mesenchymal transition-like and mesench-ymal to epithelial transition-like processes
might be involved in the pathogenesis of pelvic endometriosis. Hum. Reprod. 2012, 27, 712–721. [CrossRef]
146. Sourial, S.; Tempest, N.; Hapangama, D.K. Theories on the pathogenesis of endometriosis. Int. J. Reprod. Med. 2014, 2014, 179515.
[CrossRef]

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, 10554

27 of 29

147. Wessels, J.M.; Kay, V.R.; Leyland, N.A.; Agarwal, S.K.; Foster, W.G. Assessing brain-derived neurotrophic factor as a novel clinical
marker of endometriosis. Fertil. Steril. 2016, 105, 119–128.e5. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
148. Rocha, A.L.; Vieira, E.L.; Ferreira, M.C.; Maia, L.M.; Teixeira, A.L.; Reis, F.M. Plasma brain-derived neurotrophic factor in women
with pelvic pain: A potential biomarker for endometriosis? Biomark. Med. 2017, 11, 313–317. [CrossRef]
149. Nisenblat, V.; Prentice, L.; Bossuyt, P.M.; Farquhar, C.; Hull, M.L.; Johnson, N. Combination of the non-invasive tests for the
diagnosis of endometriosis. Cochrane Database Syst. Rev. 2016, 7, CD012281. [CrossRef]
150. Ural, U.M.; Tekin, Y.B.; Cure, M.; Sahin, F.K. Serum YKL-40 levels as a novel marker of inflammation in patients with endometriosis.
Clin. Exp. Obstet. Gynecol. 2015, 42, 495–497.
151. Agarwal, A.; Gupta, S.; Sharma, R.K. Role of oxidative stress in female reproduction. Reprod. Biol. Endocrinol. 2005, 3, 28.
[CrossRef]
152. Christodoulakos, G.; Augoulea, A.; Lambrinoudaki, I.; Sioulas, V.; Creatsas, G. Pathogenesis of endometriosis: The role of
defective ‘immunosurveillance’. Eur. J. Contracept. Reprod. Health Care 2007, 12, 194–202. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
153. Augoulea, A.; Mastorakos, G.; Lambrinoudaki, I.; Christodoulakos, G.; Creatsas, G. The role of the oxidative-stress in the
endometriosis-relatedinfertility. Gynecol. Endocrinol. 2009, 25, 75–81. [CrossRef]
154. Polak, G.; Barczyński, B.; Wertel, I.; Kwaśniewski, W.; Bednarek, W.; Derewianka-Polak, M.; Fraszczak,
˛
K.; Olajossy, M.; Kotarski, J.
Disrupted iron metabolism in peritoneal fluid may induce oxidative stress in the peritoneal cavity of women with endometriosis.
Ann. Agric. Environ. Med. 2018, 25, 587–592. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
155. Morgan, M.; Liu, Z. Crosstalk of reactive oxygen species and NF-κB signaling. Cell Res. 2011, 21, 103–115. [CrossRef]
156. Hirsch, M.; Duffy, J.; Davis, C.J.; Nieves Plana, M.; Khan, K.S. International Collaboration to Harmonise Outcomes and Measures
for Endometriosis. Diagnostic accuracy of cancer antigen 125 for endometriosis: A systematic review and meta-analysis. BJOG
2016, 123, 1761–1768. [CrossRef]
157. May, K.E.; Conduit-Hulbert, S.A.; Villar, J.; Kirtley, S.; Kennedy, S.H.; Becker, C.M. Peripheral biomarkers of endometriosis: A
systematic review. Hum. Reprod. Update 2010, 16, 651–674. [CrossRef]
158. Nisenblat, V.; Sharkey, D.J.; Wang, Z.; Evans, S.F.; Healey, M.; Ohlsson Teague, E.M.C.; Print, C.G.; Robertson, S.A.; Hull, M.L.
Plasma microRNAs display limited potential as diagnostic tools for endometriosis. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 2019, 104, 1999–2022.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
159. Sahin, C.; Mamillapalli, R.; Yi, K.W.; Taylor, H.S. microRNA Let-7b: A Novel treatment for endometriosis. J. Cell Mol. Med. 2018,
22, 5346–5353. [CrossRef]
160. Liu, Y.; Chen, J.; Zhu, X.; Tang, L.; Luo, X.; Shi, Y. Role of miR-449b-3p in endometriosis via effects on endometrial stromal cell
proliferation and angiogenesis. Mol. Med. Rep. 2018, 18, 3359–3365. [CrossRef]
161. Rekker, K.; Tasa, T.; Saare, M.; Samuel, K.; Kadastik, Ü.; Karro, H.; Götte, M.; Salumets, A.; Peters, M. Differentially-Expressed
miRNAs in Ectopic Stromal Cells Contribute to Endometriosis Development: The Plausible Role of miR-139-5p and miR-375. Int.
J. Mol. Sci. 2018, 19, 3789. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
162. Laudanski, P.; Charkiewicz, R.; Tolwinska, A.; Szamatowicz, J.; Charkiewicz, A.; Niklinski, J. Profiling of Selected MicroRNAs in
Proliferative Eutopic Endometrium of Women with Ovarian Endometriosis. Biomed. Res. Int. 2015, 2015, 760698. [CrossRef]
163. Laudanski, P.; Charkiewicz, R.; Kuzmicki, M.; Szamatowicz, J.; Charkiewicz, A.; Niklinski, J. MicroRNAs expression profiling
of eutopic proliferative endometrium in women with ovarian endometriosis. Reprod. Biol. Endocrinol. 2013, 11, 78. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
164. Gu, C.L.; Zhang, Z.; Fan, W.S.; Li, L.A.; Ye, M.X.; Zhang, Q.; Zhang, N.N.; Li, Z.; Meng, Y.G. Identification of MicroRNAs as
Potential Biomarkers in Ovarian Endometriosis. Reprod. Sci. 2020, 27, 1715–1723. [CrossRef]
165. Zafari, N.; Tarafdari, A.M.; Izadi, P.; Noruzinia, M.; Yekaninejad, M.S.; Bahramy, A.; Mohebalian, A. A Panel of Plasma miRNAs
199b-3p, 224–225p and Let-7d-3p as Non-Invasive Diagnostic Biomarkers for Endometriosis. Reprod. Sci. 2021, 28, 991–999.
[CrossRef]
166. Farsimadan, M.; Ismail Haje, M.; Khudhur Mawlood, C.; Arabipour, I.; Emamvirdizadeh, A.; Takamoli, S.; Masumi, M.; Vaziri, H.
MicroRNA variants in endometriosis and its severity. Br. J. Biomed. Sci. 2021, 12, 1–5.
167. Raja, M.H.R.; Farooqui, N.; Zuberi, N.; Ashraf, M.; Azhar, A.; Baig, R.; Badar, B.; Rehman, R. Endometriosis, infertility and
MicroRNA’s: A review. J. Gynecol. Obstet. Hum. Reprod. 2021, 50, 102157. [CrossRef]
168. Monnaka, V.U.; Hernandes, C.; Heller, D.; Podgaec, S. Overview of miRNAs for the non-invasive diagnosis of endometriosis:
Evidence, challenges and strategies. A systematic review. Einstein 2021, 19, eRW5704. [CrossRef]
169. Coutinho, L.M.; Ferreira, M.C.; Rocha, A.L.L.; Carneiro, M.M.; Reis, F.M. New biomarkers in endometriosis. Adv. Clin. Chem.
2019, 89, 59–77.
170. Bjorkman, S.; Taylor, H.S. microRNAs in endometriosis: Biological function and emerging biomarker candidates. Biol. Reprod.
2019, 100, 1135–1146. [CrossRef]
171. Zhou, C.; Zhang, T.; Liu, F.; Zhou, J.; Ni, X.; Huo, R.; Shi, Z. The differential expression of mRNAs and long noncoding RNAs
between ectopic and eutopic endometria provides new insights into adenomyosis. Mol. Biosyst. 2016, 12, 362–370. [CrossRef]
172. Liu, S.; Xin, W.; Tang, X.; Qiu, J.; Zhang, Y.; Hua, K. LncRNA H19 Overexpression in Endometriosis and its Utility as a Novel
Biomarker for Predicting Recurrence. Reprod. Sci. 2020, 27, 1687–1697. [CrossRef]
173. Huan, Q.; Cheng, S.C.; Du, Z.H.; Ma, H.F.; Li, C. LncRNA AFAP1-AS1 regulates proliferation and apoptosis of endometriosis
through activating STAT3/TGF-β/Smad signaling via miR-424-5p. J. Obstet. Gynaecol. Res. 2021, 47, 2394–2405. [CrossRef]

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, 10554

28 of 29

174. Cui, L.; Chen, S.; Wang, D.; Yang, Q. LINC01116 promotes proliferation and migration of endometrial stromal cells by targeting
FOXP1 via sponging miR-9-5p in endometriosis. J. Cell Mol. Med. 2021, 25, 2000–2012. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
175. Chang, C.Y.; Tseng, C.C.; Lai, M.T.; Chiang, A.J.; Lo, L.C.; Chen, C.M.; Yen, M.J.; Sun, L.; Yang, L.; Hwang, T.; et al. Genetic
impacts on thermostability of onco-lncRNA HOTAIR during the development and progression of endometriosis. PLoS ONE 2021,
16, e0248168. [CrossRef]
176. Wang, X.; Zhang, J.; Liu, X.; Wei, B.; Zhan, L. Long noncoding RNAs in endometriosis: Biological functions, expressions, and
mechanisms. J. Cell Physiol. 2021, 236, 6–14. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
177. Hadfield, R.M.; Mardon, H.J.; Barlow, D.H.; Kennedy, S.H. Endometriosis in monozygotic twins. Fertil. Steril. 1997, 68, 941–942.
[CrossRef]
178. Montgomery, G.W.; Mortlock, S.; Giudice, L.C. Should genetics now be considered the pre-eminent etiologic factor in endometriosis? J. Minim. Invasive Gynecol. 2020, 27, 280–286. [CrossRef]
179. Koninckx, P.R.; Ussia, A.; Adamyan, L.; Wattiez, A.; Gomel, V.; Martin, D.C. Pathogenesis of endometriosis: The genetic/epigenetic
theory. Fertil. Steril. 2019, 111, 327–340. [CrossRef]
180. Uno, S.; Zembutsu, H.; Hirasawa, A.; Takahashi, A.; Kubo, M.; Akahane, T.; Aoki, D.; Kamatani, N.; Hirata, K.; Nakamura, Y. A
genome-wide association study identifies genetic variants in the CDKN2BAS locus associated with endometriosis in Japanese.
Nat. Genet. 2010, 42, 707–710. [CrossRef]
181. Adachi, S.; Tajima, A.; Quan, J.; Haino, K.; Yoshihara, K.; Masuzaki, H.; Katabuchi, H.; Ikuma, K.; Suginami, H.; Nishida, N.; et al.
Meta-analysis of genome-wide association scans for genetic susceptibility to endometriosis in Japanese population. J. Hum. Genet.
2010, 55, 816–821. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
182. Painter, J.N.; Anderson, C.A.; Nyholt, J.R.; Macgregor, S.; Lin, J.; Lee, S.H.; Lambert, A.; Zhao, Z.Z.; Roseman, F.; Guo, Q.; et al.
Genome-wide association study identifies a locus at 7p15.2 associated with endometriosis. Nat. Genet. 2011, 43, 51–54. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
183. Nyholt, D.R.; Low, S.K.; Anderson, C.A.; Painter, J.N.; Uno, S.; Morris, A.P.; MacGregor, S.; Gordon, S.D.; Henders, A.K.; Martin,
N.G.; et al. Genome-wide association meta-analysis identifies new endometriosis risk loci. Nat. Genet. 2012, 44, 1355–1359.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
184. Pagliardini, L.; Gentilini, D.; Vigano’, P.; Panina-Bordignon, P.; Busacca, M.; Candiani, M.; Di Blasio, A.M. An Italian association
study and meta-analysis with previous GWAS confirm WNT4, CDKN2BAS and FN1 as the first identified susceptibility loci for
endometriosis. J. Med. Genet. 2013, 50, 43–46. [CrossRef]
185. Fung, J.N.; Holdsworth-Carson, S.J.; Sapkota, Y.; Zhao, Z.Z.; Jones, L.; Girling, J.E.; Paiva, P.; Healey, M.; Nyholt, D.R.; Rogers,
P.A.; et al. Functional evaluation of genetic variants associated with endometriosis near GREB1. Hum. Reprod. 2015, 30, 1263–1275.
[CrossRef]
186. Sapkota, Y.; Fassbender, A.; Bowdler, L.; Fung, J.N.; Peterse, D.; Montgomery, G.W.; Nyholt, D.R.; D’Hooghe, T.M. Independent
Replication and Meta-Analysis for Endometriosis Risk Loci. Twin Res. Hum. Genet. 2015, 18, 518–525. [CrossRef]
187. Mafra, F.; Catto, M.; Bianco, B.; Barbosa, C.P.; Christofolini, D. Association of WNT4 polymorphisms with endometriosis in
infertile patients. J. Assist. Reprod. Genet. 2015, 32, 1359–1364. [CrossRef]
188. Albertsen, H.M.; Chettier, R.; Farrington, P.; Ward, K. Genome-wide association study link novel loci to endometriosis. PLoS ONE
2013, 8, e58257. [CrossRef]
189. Sobalska-Kwapis, M.; Smolarz, B.; Słomka, M.; Szaflik, T.; K˛epka, E.; Kulig, B.; Siewierska-Górska, A.; Polak, G.; Romanowicz,
H.; Strapagiel, D.; et al. New variants near RHOJ and C2, HLA-DRA region and susceptibility to endometriosis in the Polish
population-The genome-wide association study. Eur. J. Obstet. Gynecol. Reprod. Biol. 2017, 217, 106–112. [CrossRef]
190. Kim, C.; Yang, H.; Fukushima, Y.; Saw, P.E.; Lee, J.; Park, J.S.; Park, I.; Jung, J.; Kataoka, H.; Lee, D.; et al. Vascular RhoJ is an
effective and selective target for tumor angiogenesis and vascular disruption. Cancer Cell 2014, 25, 102–117. [CrossRef]
191. Savaris, R.F.; Hamilton, A.E.; Lessey, B.A.; Giudice, L.C. Endometrial gene expression in early pregnancy: Lessons from human
ectopic pregnancy. Reprod. Sci. 2008, 15, 797–816. [CrossRef]
192. Bylińska, A.; Wilczyńska, K.; Malejczyk, J.; Milewski, Ł.; Wagner, M.; Jasek, M.; Niepiekło-Miniewska, W.; Wiśniewski, A.;
Płoski, R.; Barcz, E.; et al. The impact of HLA-G, LILRB1 and LILRB2 gene polymorphisms on susceptibility to and severity of
endometriosis. Mol. Genet. Genom. 2018, 293, 601–613. [CrossRef]
193. Osiński, M.; Mostowska, A.; Wirstlein, P.; Wender-Ożegowska, E.; Jagodziński, P.P.; Szczepańska, M. The assessment of GWAS—
Identified polymorphisms associated with infertility risk in Polish women with endometriosis. Ginekol. Pol. 2018, 89, 304–310.
[CrossRef]
194. Christofolini, D.M.; Mafra, F.A.; Catto, M.C.; Bianco, B.; Barbosa, C.P. New candidate genes associated to endometriosis. Gynecol.
Endocrinol. 2019, 35, 62–65. [CrossRef]
195. Rahmioglu, N.; Montgomery, G.W.; Zondervan, K.T. Genetics of endometriosis. Womens Health 2015, 11, 577–586. [CrossRef]
196. Cardoso, J.V.; Perini, J.A.; Machado, D.E.; Pinto, R.; Medeiros, R. Systematic review of genome-wide association studies on
susceptibility to endometriosis. Eur. J. Obstet. Gynecol. Reprod. Biol. 2020, 255, 74–82. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
197. Mear, L.; Herr, M.; Fauconnier, A.; Pineau, C.; Vialard, F. Polymorphisms and endometriosis: A systematic review and metaanalyses. Hum. Reprod. Update 2020, 26, 73–102. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
198. Bulun, S.E.; Monsavais, D.; Pavone, M.E.; Dyson, M.; Xue, Q.; Attar, E.; Tokunaga, H.; Su, E.J. Role of estrogen receptor-β in
endometriosis. Semin. Reprod. Med. 2012, 30, 39–45. [CrossRef]

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, 10554

29 of 29

199. Szaflik, T.; Smolarz, B.; Mroczkowska, B.; Kulig, B.; Soja, M.; Romanowicz, H.; Bryś, M.; Forma, E.; Szyłło, K. An Analysis of ESR2
and CYP19A1 Gene Expression Levels in Women with Endometriosis. In Vivo 2020, 34, 1765–1771. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
200. Szaflik, T.; Smolarz, B.; Romanowicz, H.; Bryś, M.; Forma, E.; Szyłło, K. Polymorphisms in the 30 UTR Region of ESR2 and
CYP19A1 Genes in Women with Endometriosis. Eur. J. Obstet. Gynecol. Reprod. Biol. 2020, 250, 241–245. [CrossRef]
201. Smolarz, B.; Szaflik, T.; Romanowicz, H.; Szyłło, K. Polymorphisms in the 30 UTR Region of ESR2 and CYP19A1 Genes and Its
Influence on Allele-Specific Gene Expression in Endometriosis. Dis. Markers 2020, 2020, 7. [CrossRef]
202. Smolarz, B.; Romanowicz, H. Association between single nucleotide polymorphism of the CYP19A1 and ESR2 genes and
endometriosis. Arch. Gynecol. Obstet. 2021, 304, 439–445. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
203. Zondervan, K.T.; Becker, C.M.; Missmer, S.A. Endometriosis. N. Engl. J. Med. 2020, 382, 1244–1256. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
204. Redwine, D. Regarding “Should Genetics Now Be Considered the Pre-eminent Etiologic Factor in Endometriosis?”. J. Minim.
Invasive Gynecol. 2020, 27, 1426–1427. [CrossRef]
205. Panir, K.; Schjenken, J.E.; Robertson, S.A.; Hull, M.L. Non-coding RNAs in endometriosis: A narrative review. Hum. Reprod.
Update 2018, 24, 497–515. [CrossRef]

